---
title: "The 2024 Election"
slug: 'the-2024-election'
createdAt: '2024-11-06T15:45:03+0000'
seoTitle: "The 2024 Election"
seoDescription: "Wherein I admit to my displeasure I'm a little bummed out and kinda freaked out."
tags: ['literature']
---

Oh, fuck it. The blog is for me, anyway, and I don't think anyone actually reads it. The blog is an exorcism of my own thoughts, it's pretty much me screaming into the dark (which begs the question of why I put so much effort into screaming so many words to no one, but I digress).

By the way, I understand the hubris of even talking about politics in a forum that is hardly about politics. I'm sure you can think of twenty YouTubers who have gone out to say "Trump is a criminal rapist who hates democracy!" or "Trump is a hero against the woke agenda and he's going to expose the media for the corrupters they are!"

What bothers me is that he's both and neither of these things, which leads me to what really bothers me about this election: this isn't actually about politics. If we're talking about the political side, objectively, his proposals aren't bad, there's nothing controversial or revolutionary about them. One, he wants to fix the economy. I know a lot of recent graduates who can't find a job. This was not the case between 2016 to 2020. Two, he wants to reduce immigration. In New York City, where we are straining public resources on migrants - and this is pretty perceptible, this is not just in the eye of the beholder - this is a reasonable demand. You can argue about the morality of doing so and so to migrants, but it's inarguable that every previous president was concerned with immigration, and Trump has certainly done less opprobrious things to foreigners compared to other presidents.

I think, judging by his remarks, these are the two clearest things he will work on. Everything else is rather murky. On abortion, he clearly said he would not seek a federal ban. But maybe he might, who knows. However, that doesn't track with him since he began his public career - what a weird thing to say - since 2015. On the wars in Ukraine and Israel, I'm not really sure what he's thinking. I mean, every president does not want war, duh. Climate change, yeah that's a no-go. I've been experiencing increasingly warmer Octobers, and there was obviously the recent hurricane in the autumn.

Some things he has said have bothered me, like pardoning some of the January 6th rioters, and I call them _rioters_, not insurrectionists, as I find it ... strange that insurrectionists would not use, well, guns. Even then, they hurt quite a bit of police men and women, so it's fairly inexcusable. Then again, who knows what he means. On the January 6th thing once more, I'm not convinced he had malicious intent against the United States; I think he was just fired up and did whatever out of sheer nerve juice. Again, he was the president of the United States, vested with extraordinary power; he could have done anything, but he threw out a few lawsuits, threw out a few tweets, then sat in his chair and got really angry at Mike Pence. This sounds like an ordinary person, perhaps with lesser ego control than most. However, without a doubt he was negligent in his duties to the country by not ensuring a peaceful transition to the succeeding administration, which ultimately hurts the American people. Furthermore, courts have found him committing sexual abuse and frauding lenders for his business, the former decades ago, the latter fairly recently. I don't believe that disqualifies anyone from being president, but it still bothers me, as I'm surprised a generally-squeamish electorate, who usually disdains to hear about a politician's private life, set that aside.

So there are two very strong things going on with him, immigration and the economy, and there are issues with him that, depending on the day and your mood, you can kinda let go. I mean, being bad at his job, sometimes, and being bad as a person, most of the time, don't disqualify him from being president. And really, I don't dislike him as a person. I dislike his attitude toward women, but that is his _private_ attitude, not his public attitude, and god knows everyone is hiding something. I think he's funny, and probably a likeable guy if you got to know him. He definitely tries to get a reaction from his audience; he's a bit of a ham that way. I always say, I think it's really funny that he treated the Clemson Tigers to a banquet of McDonald's.

I've thought this for a while: if Trump would get the country in trouble, it would either be in an international or, likelier, constitutional crisis. For one simple reason: he doesn't like to read. He doesn't like laws and, conveniently, the presidency can ignore laws, which his predecessors, Biden, Obama, Bush, have all done.

I don't have anything against him and I hope he has a good presidency. He has demonstrated that he is able to keep the country safe under his control. With a wide and diverse coalition backing him, he will likely do a good job. He has earned the right to power.

So why am I awake? Why can't I rest, or my heart stop pounding? Why am I writing this down? Why am I committing, in my opinion, the most egregious act, the act of hypocrisy, of not practicing what I preach and staying out of politics?

I have no issue with Trump, it's all the other shit around him. We have constructed a culture that is inseparable from Trump.

How the hell did we get here?

I deal with people mentioning what he says. I deal with people defending every step that he takes. I deal with people calling the media corrupt and misrepresenting what he has to say. I deal with people saying he has been vindicated. I deal with people maligning the Democratic Party because of some shit they read on Twitter. I deal with Trump's "wins", and his enemies' "losses". I deal with this every. Day. I feel like I have to come up with a response every. Time. Because I can't agree, because nothing is black or white. He's not a saint, neither are his enemies, the world is the world, but every. Fucking. Day. I have to hear about his storyline and who he is besting or, on the opposite end, who he is shitting on.

I deal with it because I'm an egoist. I like to be right. If I'm kinder to myself, I do it because I find the topics interesting. Other people do not engage. Other people have retreated, and have nothing to say. Because it's so fucking miserable. It's heartbreaking in particular when you see younger people give up on it.

I'm so tired. I fancy myself a kind of historian and like to look backwards in the past for how I should feel in the future. I don't know if America has experienced anything like this in the past, which makes me all the more nervous.

What bothers me is that not only can Never-Trumpers never be happy, which, you know, gotta move on, it's that people who support Trump are also fucking depressed. Trump can never win. He has too many enemies. Did you hear what CNN said? Did you hear what this YouTuber said? Now they're censoring him on blah blah blah! He can never win because they are setting him up to fight _people_, the people he is sworn to serve, the people who in turn serve as the audience for his jokes, the specific trait he likes in them.

By the way, the whole Elon thing is probably why I'm most miserable, though I vaguely understand that Elon suffers the same problem as Trump, that is, people make him up to be something he is not but he plays it up anyway. Trump plays himself as a normal guy, so when he does stupid shit you kinda just forgive him. Elon has somehow acquired the reputation of a genius and yet he still does stupid shit, then people applaud his stupid shit as visionary.

What amazes me is that we all squabble over _nothing_, over what a man will or will not do and why he will choose so. This is in direct contrast to reacting when he does, in fact, do so, which seems to me the most reasonable thing to do. I wondered often if I and my friends and my family do so because we have a lot of time in our hands. I think a more plausible reason is that we have invested so much in his _story_ we see every little development as the completion of his character arc. This is nonsense, but human beings are nonsensical. Because he sets pins up, because he promises he will knock them down, we eagerly await his knocking them down or failing to do so, for any reason we invent, and often the reason has little to do with him but the sinister _other_, either Project 2025 or the liberal media.

We have finally done it: we have invented self-perpetuating witch hunts. And this is my true fear. I believe president Biden was told by Xi Jinping that democracies are doomed to fail. I wonder if we will finally destroy ourselves not because of what someone has done, nothing so tangible as that, but as to the enemies we can imagine in our heads.

Which comes off to me as histrionics as I write this, which is good, because, again, the blog is my exorcism and helps me find out what sounds like bullshit and what sounds closer to reality.

Which leads me to conclude I'm a fairly sensitive person - believe me, all my life has confirmed this - but, then again, the world is full of sensitive people, including you, the reader, most likely, otherwise why the fuck are you reading this, so I think the plaint is fair.

And honestly, if people believe Trump will destroy democracy, the belief in part is true, because people will act as if the belief is true, thus negating its actual happening. And if people believe Trump will save democracy, that is also true, for the same reason. Meaning everyone is living in a world divergent from our own and nothing happy can come from being removed from reality so entirely.

I'm either perceiving the effect of this on culture or I'm perceiving the heightened expression of something that has always existed. There's a lot of fake-it-'til-you-make-it culture, and there's, obviously, hate culture. Again, Trump has faked nothing, his claim to power is authentic. What I mean is, I see a lot of people concerned now about their authentic selves, I guess myself included. People filter what they show of themselves: no one wants to decide on politics, no one wants to show they're Trump supporters, no one wants to argue anymore in case they're rebutted with a "fact", again, probably taken from Twitter. The people who do argue go fucking all-out: they have "facts", they make their voices louder, they make their words meaner. Then again, I saw symptoms of this in the Obama era, so I can't say.

As for hate culture, Trump has generated a farm of content for people to hate, and Trump's "enemies", in turn, do the exact same thing. Who the hell has so much energy to hate what Disney has to do? Who the hell has so much energy to hate what Trump says on Twitter? But the hate finds friends, oddly enough, or, likelier, apathetic acquaintances, gets views, gets attention, validates the hate. It is okay now to say "Fuck Trump". It is also okay now to say "Fuck the people who say Fuck Trump". Both are bad. Again, this is not hatred of a person, this is hatred of _people_, particularly people who have differing opinions from you. This is madness.

This is a really shitty culture for someone to grow up in. You are rewarded for retreating inward and not making your opinion known, or you are rewarded for making sport off of other people's misery. The former is weakening the American spirit. Why are we sedating ourselves on the new superhero movie? Why can't we come up with something original like "Squid Game"? Why is it that the only art of substance that we consume are documentaries or critiques? Is there _nothing_ positive to say, from the left to the right?

The irony of this is that people have adopted this culture because they _think_ they know what he's thinking and they _think_ they know what the source of his success comes from. The true man is a mystery, he is a human being with origins even he can't put into words. So, once more, we are fighting over nothing.

What can't be lost in all this is that the people fighting over nothing are people with real emotions. That is the actual something in this war over nothing. People have picked sides. They have defended positions. They have invested so much emotion into this war that to step away from it, and they should, is akin to destroying a part of themselves. Emotions are real, they have tangible presences and effects, and the way the current culture is framed is whether you are allowed to feel the way you do, when the obvious answer is, "Of course you are", whatever you believe. But other people are allowed to criticize your take. Thus the feeling of losing, then the need to double down on one's take, thus the cycle continuing.

Thus the continuous paranoia. I know I am insane when I am walking through my neighborhood wondering, "Who voted for Trump?" Why do I do that? Why are people concerned about retaliation for endorsing Trump? He's a popular president, of the most powerful country in the world, what retaliation could there be? I can only speak for myself that I find my paranoia comes from needing to defend my position constantly, as if I can hear a million voices screaming against it. This is ridiculous and indicates rather well how poisonous the conversation is concerning him.

Both sides paint the outcome of the election in apocalyptic terms. "It's the end of democracy!" "It's the end of the country!" We're likelier to live on than not; the worse outcome is that we are finessed by some malicious actor. But when people exaggerate, you have to live somewhere in-between these exaggerations. You have to have a take on the exaggerations themselves, for they are the only poles in which public opinion may live in. My paranoia over your paranoia, that I think you will not like my take, is calculated into my response, such that your paranoia over my paranoia is enhanced as well. And as the idols of our opinions grow larger and larger and more powerful, we begin to look for every piece of ammunition we can find: we scour through tweets, we pore through YouTube comments, we look for every gotcha so we can dismiss the enemy and say, Oh, they're biased. Thus getting further and further away from the truth.

By the way, people in America do have real problems. Florida has an unusually restrictive abortion ban, a ban after the sixth week of pregnancy. But other states have committed to protecting abortion in some semblance, including Kansas. I'm glad we're having this discussion and people are able to actually air their grievances now. I don't see issues as insurmountable, so long as we talk it out. My concern is that we are now just talking to walls, or ourselves, as I am.

Maybe the _real_ monster is the internet and people like me who desire a forum to make their opinion known (and if someone is indeed actually reading this, I reserve the space of this blog exclusively for myself, I pretend not to be official or truthful in any way, only, hopefully, interesting). Maybe we should give up on knowing the truth, through the internet, at least. Perhaps the better answer is, maybe we should not be infatuated with one position over the other. Which are pretty depressing conclusions to make, that of admitting our powerlessness. Which is why we don't choose these conclusions. Thus cycle continuing.

You know, though, as I write all this down, this comes off as the non-concerns of an East Coast liberal elite. I like to think of the people who awarded Trump the power of the presidency, someone, say, who lives in Iowa, who could not give a shit about anything that's going on in Twitter or in the media and is only concerned about whether they can feed themselves or their children and plan for the future. This is in direct contrast to dull me, who voted merely so to not talk about any of this shit anymore. When compared to that, I can wait four years (though who knows what shit will be stirred up in 2028). We have no real enemies; there are people who seek enemies, to hate them, to keep themselves alive, because they hate themselves, and thus you cannot defeat these people. So this seems to be the lesson of all of this, and why I'm grateful to have put all of my thoughts on the page: one can only hold onto what is before them, all else does not matter.

Perhaps a bright spot in all this is that, Trump winning, he has finally completed his character arc - and again, it is an insanity to call it a character arc, but "main character energy" is a real thing, showing how far removed we are from reality - and we are now done. Because his story was not finished, we experienced intense dissatisfaction, we grumbled, we chose sides, old ways of thinking held fast and thought they would survive. Now that the story is concluded and we know what the truth is, culture now passes through the throes of chaos and we can get to a kind of healing, where something new can happen.

Because I spent this time talking about reality and unreality, I will now _choose_ this interpretation, for it makes me happiest, and I can discern no other interpretation being right. Another lesson: it is optimal to choose the happiest belief, when fact cannot be found. I hope Trump supporters are happy, because then I am happy they are happy. That's the point of democracies: _someone_ has to be happy for exercising their power to vote, and I'm pretty happy to have participated in this long national conversation, though it'd be nice if I could get some clarity as to what precisely we agreed upon. Then again, wouldn't clarity for _anything_ in life be welcomed?

Anyway, I'm done talking about this. I have lived like this for eight years. My friends who support Trump have lived like this for eight years. My friends who do not have lived like this for eight years. I'm so. Fucking. Done. I literally only wrote this to finally go to bed with only thoughts about stupid shit, like "Elden Ring" or the song of the week. By the way, this culture of hiding one's feelings is absolutely affecting music, such that most of the great albums this decade are about exposing the artists' most awkward feelings, as if one is voyeuristically privy to their thoughts. We are no longer interested in salacious stories - the president already has many - we are interested in salacious _thoughts_, as if thoughts have any venom in them and should be banished. I want to never write about this ever again, unless the cultural angle comes up again, and it's a pretty interesting angle honestly, and I hope Trump never gives me a reason to comment _all too much_ on his presidency, and certainly not in this blog where I make fart jokes.

And if you actually got this fair, I'm putting this under "literature" as 1) who's going to read my literary takes anyway and 2) my philosophy is influenced by Spinoza and Wittgenstein, and that's all this write-up is, it's an expression of my philosophy.
