---
title: "Akira Toriyama's Dragon Ball"
slug: 'akira-toriyama-dragon-ball'
createdAt: '2024-04-09T11:26:09+0000'
seoTitle: "Akira Toriyama's Dragon Ball"
seoDescription: 'We talk about Akira Toriyama and his influential series, Dragon Ball. May he rest in peace.'
tags: ['animation', 'anime']
---

I had never been a "Dragon Ball" fan. I found the anime offputtingly masculine. It largely consists of very muscular men shouting at each other how they were going to beat the other person's body into an unrecognizable pulp. Also: long. I think "Yu Yu Hakusho" was how I got into anime. Something I'm not sure about Togashi is whether his wife, Naoko Takeuchi, encouraged him to look beyond the overly macho tendencies of manga at the time or that feeling had been with him since the beginning of his career. (For context, "Hakusho" began in 1990, "Fist of the North Star" ended in 1988, "Saint Seiya" in 1990, and "Stardust Crusaders" was still being serialized.) I suspect the answer lies in both. I preferred Togashi's psychological approach to his characters and his plot versus the ultimate and steely virtues of protagonists overcoming ultimate evil.

This is of course the wrong interpretation. I did not get into "Dragon Ball" until...last year, after a long maturity period in my perspective of art. What helped immensely was getting into Toriyama's "SAND LAND" and "COWA!" After "Dragon Ball" I dived into "Manga Theater".

I'm wrong. "Dragon Ball" is really beautiful. It's a different approach to exploring the human psyche, which is why it has had such an influence on manga. I wish more people read it and I wish more people made things like it, which is a surprising thing to say about a manga made by a man who didn't particularly care for manga. For this write-up, I'm focusing on "Dragon Ball Z", which particularly struck me as offputting when I was young.

I think, when analyzing "One Piece" last year, I recounted that humor was critical to shōnen manga; without it, you...don't have anything. I didn't like Toriyama's work until I appreciated this fact, looking at you, "My Hero Academia" and "Jujutsu Kaisen" (though Gege's greatest gift to humanity will forever be Chapter 236, the funniest event in mankind's history). Part of the joy of reading Toriyama's earlier work is that you get a sense of a relaxed, laid-back guy who understood the importance behind the meaning of things over details, which translated into the comedy and adventuring he depicted. This quality is particularly touching as you read some of the later stories in "Manga Theater", during the period he married and had children; the joys of the domestic life permeate. "The Adventure of Tongpoo" is a clear example, and Goku's marriage to Chi-Chi is an especially poignant moment in today's series. "Young Master Ken'nosuke" less so, but it's _really funny_ imagining Toriyama using his manga to comment on the inanity of dating.

I also recounted how Toriyama himself did not really like making manga until late in his career; in particular, the fighting in "Dragon Ball" was not his idea, but spurred on by his editor to make his manga more popular. The fighting in "Dragon Ball"...is terrible. But that's not the point. For a man who never cared much for fighting, only for dialogue and sightseeing, this was never the point.

When Raditz descends onto Earth, beginning the very long, very cosmic and very convoluted journey that is "Dragon Ball Z", what's important is not that Raditz wants to kill people or whatever, but that he's a _jerk_, and, worse, he kidnaps Goku's son. This, to me, is what is actually important in "Dragon Ball", more than some ambition to protect other people or save the world: what is really at stake is human decency, our ability to empathize with other human beings, such that Goku, when given the chance to kill Raditz, gives mercy upon him. It's extremely unimportant whether Goku can beat Raditz; what's far more important is their exchange of ideas, particularly that of using force to get your own way, such that Toriyama would rather have Gohan, Goku's son, deliver the critical blow.

That's probably why Gohan is such a prominent character throughout the series, even though he's only important for the fighting in the Cell arc: he represents kindness, originating from himself and shown towards him. It's especially poignant that Goku's old nemesis, Piccolo, decides to protect Gohan ultimately, to add onto the series' theme of mercy, from the unique perspective of a man who used to murder people. As much as the Internet will meme on Gohan being useless, Gohan...should continue being useless. Gohan's potential should never be harnessed, as much as countries should not use the weapons they are capable of creating. He shouldn't be some warrior of justice or whatever, as many other series, before and after "Dragon Ball", have crafted, who, furthermore, lack the complete depth of character Gohan has.

American pro-wrestling and "Dragon Ball" share a lot of things in common. Neither care about the spectacle, which, however, they both try hard to get right. Of far more importance are the character stories, an underdog's rise to the top or a champion's defending their status. Further, both rely heavily on the heel/face dynamic, of the impossibly spotless hero pitted against the impossibly scummy villain.

"Dragon Ball" has the greatest heel of all time, Vegeta, whose character arc is - and I never thought I'd say this - one of the most emotional in all of anime. I think I finally "got" the series in the penultimate act of the Frieza saga. For the entire story Vegeta pretty much acts like a huge jerk: extremely vengeful, extremely ambitious, extremely greedy, extremely self-serving and extremely privileged by his Super Saiyan genes, which allow him to escape from the jaws of death countless of times. I mean, he beats up children. Vegeta is _such_ a jerk that he becomes compelling; he no longer becomes an object of the audience's hatred, and you begin to wonder what precisely makes him tick.

This is an interesting topic, that of every author's fascination with darkness. How the writer writes their villains is even more of a reflection, as compared to their heroes, of their concept of good and bad. Heroes are the solution to evil, but villains represent the fundamental _challenge_ against humanity. You know Millenials feel despair in everything they see when Iseyama makes Eren Yeager, once the hero, the omnipotent, genocidal villain of "Attack on Titan". Eren is so invincible one thinks Iseyama believes destruction of the human race is necessary (which does not make Iseyama cruel, but a Malthusian at heart). Togashi, mentioned above, believes in evil, but he thinks evil comes from human fear and weakness, as evident by Toguro and Sensui, despite how impossibly powerful they are. Toriyama flat-out does not believe in evil. Frieza is the closest to resembling a traditional shōnen villain, but, when contemplating on the character, he isn't evil because he enjoys it or profits by it, or has any ideals he wishes to defend, he's largely evil because...he's never been punished for it in his life. As a result, greatest heel in anime history? Vegeta is in the same vein - that of not really being evil - except Toriyama actually _empathizes_ with him. It's strange. A substantial part of the mystery is unshrouded when you realize Vegeta, though seemingly invincible in his appearances in the series, has faced humiliation his _entire life_. His entire existence, in fact, is a humiliation. We only see his triumphs, but his life is a neverending disappointment. Toriyama, as the author, was the only one with enough insight into his character he could actually feel bad for such an empty, sad person.

Leading to one of the most emotional moments in the series: after several confrontations with death, upon finding Frieza so _impossibly_ strong, such that he would have to survive an _endless_ series of death to defeat him, he begins to weep. It is not something he can control, and it may have been an emotion he had never felt in his own life, as he lived perpetually in the optimistic world in which he could one day defeat Frieza and reclaim his honor as Prince of the Saiyans. He now feels soul-crushing, life-denying despair. It's really, well, _sad_. It's one panel. Toriyama doesn't ask for sympathy, but he does ask you to look at him as a human being. It's one of the most powerful panels in the genre.

Vegeta has as excellent an arc in the Cell saga - Cell is also a really wonderful villain - but we're landing now in the culmination of Vegeta's arc, amusingly, in the prologue to the Majin Buu saga. Considering Toriyama knew he wanted to end the series by this point, it's shocking he had such a thoughtful conclusion to Vegeta's story. Up until this point, Vegeta, who pretty much lived a life only of conflict, had been savoring to justify his existence by defeating Goku. He had been given this opportunity by the instigators of this whole intergalactic kerfuffle, to the point he would kill innocent people just to get to his rival. This is pretty consistent with his character; Vegeta would have done so earlier, if he thought it would've been effective. Yet, upon finding no way to achieve this goal nor any happiness in its achievement, he decides to give up his life to stop the awakening Majin Buu. Before he sacrifices himself, however, he holds his son Trunks, and says, "I've never hugged you before." Such a small touch, but it reveals his entire world. This is the Saiyan Prince, who had never been held by his own father before, finally learning how profound kindness is.

This is the greatest power of "Dragon Ball": the reality is that Toriyama finds evil so boring because it is so weak and powerless. Humanity and decency are far more interesting and profound in their comprehension. That the villains are powerful is incidental, not necessary. This is abundantly clear with Buu and, too, in "SAND LAND".

And this goes into Toriyama's greatest power as a mangaka: he merely wanted to show his audience what they wanted to see. The audience secretly wants to see heroism, they want to see people beat the odds, they want to see good triumph over evil, so we can live in a good world. At the heart of entertainment is the need to interact with the beauty of the world. It is not (to allow myself a small dig at current events in "Chainsawman") out of desire to witness the author's cleverness, in their ability to buck audience's expectations and figure out ways to make them "feel" things. Every human has a sense of decency, as much as the blind men have a sense of the elephant they are touching; it is a subject immense and constantly contorting, and one of the functions of the artists (which they are free to dispose) is to give a wider view of it. To shrug, to give up on the subject, to smirk and say, "Well, it's hopeless" - I can't call it immoral, cheap word as it is, but I can call it _pathetic_. More adequately, _lame_.

Making art is a brave task. Whether we want to or not, whether we _like_ to or not, our beliefs seep through the work, and it's easy to discredit it, abandon it, insult it with sarcasm and coded words. Toriyama played games like this often, sometimes making plot choices because they were the exact opposite of what his readers wanted. But when he played these types of games with his readers, he was having fun - thus leading his audience to have fun too. That's his legacy: belief in joy. The profession of entertainer is a noble one indeed. We shall not let him die a second time.
