---
title: 'A complaint to Mister Murray'
slug: 'albert-murray'
createdAt: '2022-12-01T05:02:31+0000'
seoTitle: "Library of America's Albert Murray"
seoDescription: 'I have a complaint for Albert Murray, celebrated American essayist.'
tags: ['literature']
---

Albert Murray is the Rakim of American essays.

You will find no greater treasures than in a bookstore. Most bookstores, independently owned, that are secretly not fronts for merchandise or stationery, will have a few carts or shelves dedicated to already-owned books. Browsing through these wares, once in a while, is a gift enough: you become aware of what your living world and, most importantly, your locality are reading, and you familiarize yourself with whatever is in the immense sphere of literature. Cook books, self-help, romance novels, sci-fi dime novels, essays, graphic novels, young adult fiction, poetry anthologies, plays, memoirs, history. Most of these are useless, their names forever leaving your mind, but there are not many real-world experiences where you actually learn about people as in here.

You mind the classics. Any shelf of read books will be pumped full of Dickens, Faulkner, Balzac. They simply wrote so much. Knausgaard appears a lot, but he's solid. You're a little wary of Margaret Atwood ("Handmaid's Tale"), Elena Ferrante ("My Brilliant Friend"), and Kazuo Ishiguro ("Never Let Me Go"), because their novels were adapted into television. You're not sure about Flannery O'Conner, who appears often. You will never read any novel of Jonathan Franzen's, even if they were the last books left. You will sometimes get giddy by the occasional James Joyce sighting, because people _keep_ their copy of "Ulysses". Sometimes you murmur with madness over finding Colette or Cabrera Infante, resolving to yourself that, yes, as jammed tight as your own shelf at home is at the moment, you're not leaving until you pick up it.

You only form an opinion on literature by reading. The store is there for you to read. You sample, and sample, and sample; no one should give you any shiitake for it. You would be aghast if someone forbid you from jogging in a gym or smelling the food in a restaurant. And you eventually form an opinion about other things than the writing itself. Books published under New York Review of Books (NYRB) are almost consistently great. Even if you don't like one, you know someone did. Your collection - Curzio Malaparte's "<a href="/kaputt-curzio-malaparte" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Kaputt</a>", Gerald Basil Edwards' "The Book of Ebenezer Le Page", Patrick Leigh Fermor's "A Time of Gifts", Emmet Grogan's "Ringolevio" - will consist of not a few of them. Dalkey Archive Press, William Gass' publisher, is also solid. Penguin is a little square. Modern Library is alright.

There is something about a great bookstore that constantly surprises you with its selection. Massachussetts' Brookline Booksmith is a great bookstore. One can't help but think the reason is due to Brookline's density of readers. If I recall correctly, my "Selected Poems of Wallace Stevens" was discovered on a rainy day. I don't recall when I found my yellow, edge-worn "Lost Weekend". You're disappointed you didn't buy that translation of Maimonides, in hindsight.

Sometimes you hope a literary Santa will descend on the bookstore when you need a particular book. Say you're curious about race in America and want to read someone with a great style. You have in an online cart somewhere the collected essays of James Baldwin and "Twenty Years A Slave", and Dick Gregory's "Nigger". But you really want to find them in the store. You head to the bookstore, hands in your pockets, trying to look cool in the New England cold when really you're aching to find the object of your search.

The taste of finding something even better is incomparable. As you browse through the shelves in your typical routine, you come across a black spine with a red, white and blue stripe bisecting it; on the bottom is the insignia of the Library of America, and above is the author: Murray, below this describing the volume: Collected Essays & Memoirs. You've never heard of this Murray cat, but you're somewhat suspicious that he's a fuddy duddy modernist critic or some kind of European, probably Irish, wannabe philosopher (of which there are many, many, many).

When you open it up - we go by Ford Madox Ford's 100-page/any-page test here - you may have seen this passage:

> Thus, in the second and third quarters of nineteenth century America, Negroes can find adequate historical as well as mythological documentation for "all that really matters" in the establishment of their national identity. Not that they need to do so to meet any official requirements whatsoever. After all, such is the process by which Americans are made that immigrants, for instance, need trace their roots no further back in either time or space than Ellis Island. _By the very act of arrival_, they emerge from the bottomless depths and enter the same stream of American tradition as those who landed at Plymouth. In the very act of making their way through customs, they begin the process of becoming, as Constance Rourke would put it, part Yankee, part backwoodsman and Indian - and part Negro!

and fell to bits by its music, and by the miracle of finding more than what you were looking for. You would scratch your head over some of his rhythms - that first sentence, "Negroes", "historical", "mythological", and then the tumbling-down of that informal phrase "all that really matters", his idiosyncratic way of breaking up the stiffness of this official-sounding prose into the language of me-and-you - and the imagery, particularly on this small excursion to Ellis Island, down depths, carried upstream and landing onto Plymouth, to speak to Constance Rourke about the raw essence of Americanism. It's not that I had never read essays living up to art, but here Murray graces his tongue on non-literary, non-historical, non-religious subjects. He was simply writing down his thoughts, "just my thoughts", as Jay-Z had once said. And I would copy, copy, copy, as one could tell by this blog.

> For just as certain popular post-bop musicians have given beards chic status among certain black hipsters, so had the neo-Paul Robeson image of Harry Belafonte and Sidney Poitier begun to popularize the so-called natural texture-do, which the bop era had already initiated among hipsters long before the promoters of _negritude_ began trying to philosophize it or the late Malcolm X to politicalize it.

Mind the glide of r's and then the dance of n's and o's in the next sentence:

> There are, after all, Negroes, and still other Negroes, not all of them naive, nice nonentities, non compos mentis - or even non-white.

And then there is this withering rebuke to a certain kind of soggy fiction:

> There are others whose confusion about all this even leads them to write as if no one can enjoy a spring rainscape unless he also has the right to vote, a passionate night of love unless he has executive status, or even a succulent prime steak unless he has a seat on the New York Stock Exchange - even though he has the price of the bill of fare.

### Quibbles

Not that I don't have a few quibbles.

"The Hero and the Blues", a worthy subject, has none of his rhythm, is written clinically, and, worst of all, makes him look like a square for all the authors he name-drops: Mann, Hemingway, Faulkner, Malraux, James Joyce, Louis Armstrong, et cetera. Similarly, he beats on his old pet peeve, protest fiction, though he had already done so beautifully in "The Omni-Americans". No one can dislike a man for nerding out, but one can dislike his writing. When someone writes a name - and perhaps this is more my preference than a rule of writing - they must own that name; that name cannot own their writing. If Mann already wrote on writing, then you merely point, as there is so little to elaborate.

To own a name, you simply set it to your own tune. I personally use structure, as if I were the organizer of a parade or the bandleader of a march, so that the name appears at the exact time I want to and appears for so long as I want to. James Joyce is not leaving the sentence he appeared in above - unless I say so, as I do here, tugging on his leash like a dog's and making a pitiful display of him in his enlarged Irish-blue eyes. No more and no fewer sentences shall refer to my parade floats; their purpose in the prose pointed out, they leave the essay forever.

I think Murray got caught up in an "academic"-sounding tone. After all, the human mind is infinitely complex - for many it appears not so, because they don't read, or rather, read a variety of things, from all of time, from all locations. Murray did. But expressing that complexity is a lot of work - so much so that writers would devote their entire lifetimes to comprehending then compiling all of the knowledge they've acquired into something coherent (some shall die doing so).

Murray's strength is his personal feeling. Same as every writer's. People who write textbooks and journals have perfected a very specific language that removes everything extraneous from the analysis itself, as the analysis is the only thing of interest. As a result, the matter necessarily is constrained, as only certainty is allowed (not that we are so foolish to be certain of their certainty). An economics textbook has no room for doubt; it is in the business of training future movers and shakers. What makes literature - history, philosophy, mathematics, natural sciences, fiction - so interesting is speculation, is the inquiring after a universe of doubt. The author implicitly accepts their personality is in the way of the absolute truth; the writing itself argues how little that matters.

Murray never seems to be that interesting a scholar, sometimes merely repeating his references rather than extrapolating or subverting upon them. He is just an observer, as much as his idol, William Faulkner.

We ourselves can observe these traits in an early passage in "Omni-Americans", where Murray excoriates Daniel Patrick Moynihan's 1965 report, so histrionically titled "The Negro Family: The Case For National Action":

> As for Moynihan's glib but predictably popular notions about the emasculation of the Negro male, not only do they have all the earmarks of the white American male's well-known historical trait of castrating black males by any means but the report's own statistics on illegitimate births among Negroes would seem to contradict any neat theories about the cycle of black female dominance at the very outset. \[...\]

> But then if Negro males were as thoroughly emasculated as the Moynihan consensus insists they are, there would be no current racial crisis. White people would not feel so hysterically insecure about the resentment of those whom they are convinced have lost their manhood. White men would not feel that they needed a lynch _mob_ to take revenge on _one_ uppity Negro. White policemen would not go berserk at the slightest sign of black resistance. White teachers in Harlem would be able to handle Negro pupils at least as well as the great majority of Negro teachers have always handled them elsewhere. Nor would white people ever have felt the need to enact or defend any laws against interracial marriage.

> Further, though images of black masculinity may simply be invisible to Moynihan, it does not follow that they are also nonexistent for Negroes themselves. Thus, while white supremacists were responding to Uncle Toms, Old Black Joes, and Stepin Fetchits, Negroes were celebrating John Henry, Stagolee, Jack Johnson, and Joe Louis. While white people promote wailing-wall spokesmen, black people are committed to numerous "unknown" local leaders. For all his rhetorical resonance, the late great Reverend Martin Luther King was much more highly regarded among Negroes when he _did_ more and _talked_ less, not that they didn't love the way he talked. The mass media provide unheard of publicity for empty-handed hot-air militants but the truth is that while Negroes obviously enjoy making white people nervous, they much prefer to keep them guessing. \[...\]

> That most social science technicians may be entirely unaware of the major role they play in the propagation of such folklore can be readily conceded. But the fact that they remain oblivious to the application of the material that they assemble neither reduces the degree of their involvement nor mitigates the distortion, oversimplification, and confusion that they aid and abet. As a matter of fact, their innocence, which is not altogether unlike that of certain ever so nonviolent munitions experts, allows them to function with a routine detachment that is even more deadly than deliberate underhanded manipulation of facts, figures, and interpretations. The forthright white supremacist, after all, must often contend with matters of conscience, if only to rationalize them away (which accounts for much of his need for folklore in the first place). The unwitting survey technician has no such problem. Believing himself to be free of ulterior motives, he assumes that his studies are disinterested.

Murray's writing possesses the power of a jackhammer: slowly but surely, his wit and mind pounds through the most resistant material and leaves us only with the artifacts of his reasoning.

I should emphasize this is _not_ a technical reduction of Moynihan's argument, which would consist of refuting the numbers, how those numbers were attained and what the numbers mean divorced from a certain context. This is a _logical_ reduction of Moynihan's argument, much as Socrates long ago had tore apart the Athenian assembly's arguments against him. It seeks to redefine the problem itself so that we aim correctly, rather than consistently at the wrong target.

That first clause, beginning with "As for Moynihan's glib but predictably popular notions...", probably started my love for adjectives. That jump from "Moynihan's glib" to "but predictably popular notions" is as satisfying as an acrobat's landing. It is almost as if one could see the halo Murray draws around that subject, rhetorically walking all around it - which he would through that glissade i's and a's in "earmarks of the white American male's well-known historical trait" to the eye-raising a's of "castrating black males" before stopping at the common-sense earth of t's and "e" sounds in "contradict any neat theories about the cycle of black female dominance at the very outset."

The next part of Murray's rhetoric is engaging with imagery, which at once paints an absurd picture, perhaps amusing, of white Tom's antagonizing black Jerry's in typical settings to demonstrate the silliness of the report's argument and on the other hand divorces the report's context, which is of hair-raising, apocalyptic connotations: poverty, city warfare, depression, suicide! Fool, Murray contends, there is a whole world outside of your statistics. The following rhetoric continues Murray's substituting reality over the report's picture: we would not have enough hands to count the number of reputable black role models for boys. The last two sentences have a bit of back-and-forth: "when he _did_ more and _talked_ less, not that they didn't love the way he talked," a bob weaving from "did" and "talked" and, through the negating "not", varying the "talked" by inflecting it, and "while Negroes obviously enjoy making white people nervous, they much prefer to keep them guessing," a curveball from the Mobile pitcher.

The last paragraph is just downright nasty. It's most definitely a straw man argument. It doesn't matter. The straw man's purpose is not to demonstrate a tautology; the author constructs it so he may pierce nails into it, and if his words are any good those nails by the magic of his prose will fatally strike his target. That depiction of "social science technicians", a group of people whose definition gets hazier and hazier as I read his works, as separated from reality, as even being incapable of dealing and resolving with reality, as "believing \[themselves\] to be free of ulterior motives" and therefore arrogant for it, is condemning. And, as far as love of flow goes, it's lovely.

Because love of flow is love for literature. Many have stayed up late into the evening to hear Montaigne's, Browne's, Burton's music. We are still addicted to letters, from Rilke, from Woolf. I would say my actual introduction to literature came from reading William Gass's essays, whose writing style is not a little like Murray's: colorful, imaginary, and, perhaps most importantly, angry, in a particularly Southern way, unafraid of any issue as a result of relying on that most lauded of devices, human reason.

### South to a Very Old Place

Murray's prose is wonderful. My critiques will always be but nitpicks. (I understand "The Hero and The Blues" was a lecture over being pen-and-paper prose.)

There is only one big quibble, which rests squarely on "South to a Very Old Place". The issue is that it is too damn good. This I did not expect even from the writer of "The Omni-Americans".

It begins with this astonishing scene:

> You can take the "A" train uptown from Forty-second Street in midtown Manhattan and be there in less than ten minutes. There is a stop at Fifty-ninth Street beneath the traffic circle which commemorates Christopher Columbus who once set out for destinations east on compass bearings west. But after that as often as not there are only six more express minutes to go. Then you are pulling into the IND station at 125th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue, and you are that many more miles north from Mobile, Alabama, but you are also, for better or worse, back among homefolks no matter what part of the old country you come from.

This commanding view, this scenario, this scenery, of a New York City literally growing concrete and all below your feet, is this, could it be, prose, actual fictional prose; fictional _not_ in the sense of what is "real" and not real, fictional in that the writer intends for an effect, intends to glamor and enhance over the how-it-is-ness of things?

He continues in italics, as if he were thinking in the same tone as Quentin Compson does in "The Sound and the Fury":

> _But then, going back home has probably has as much if not more to do with people as with landmarks and place names and locations on maps and mileage charts anyway. Not that home is not a place, for even in its most abstract implications it is precisely the very oldest place in the world. But even so, it is somewhere you are likely to find yourself remembering your way back to far more often than it is ever possible to go by conventional transportation. In any case, such is the fundamental interrelationship of recollection and make-believe with all journeys and locations that anywhere people do certain things in a certain way can be home. The way certain very special uptown Manhattan people talk and the way some of them walk, for instance, makes them homefolks. So whoever says you can't go home again, when you are for so many intents and purposes back whenever or wherever somebody or something makes you feel that way._

In so saying, out-philosophizes the eldest Compson, who drowned in the odor of honeysuckle. He transports you from the city's spidery streets and obscuring skyscrapers to the concept of home itself, confused itself with way-signs and meandering paths of memories and imagination; just as Murray pulls up to the Indianapolis Station with longing for Mobile behind his eyes, he just as much sighs and shrugs upon arriving at the destination of the concept that one truly can't leave certain experiences, ready for a journey that will prove him wrong again and again concerning multiple things. But that is why people go on adventures.

Because only the enemy of memoirs insist they must be "real". A memoir is remembrance. There is nothing interesting about the events of a human life except concerning the human. A memoir should be an unwrapping of the human mind, of which imagination, whimsy, and meandering make up far greater proportions than "facts".

On his journey towards New Haven, Connecticut, he cuts portraits of Robert Penn Warren and C. Vann Woodward anyone else would have been proud of:

> The one that Robert Penn Warren looks and walks and talks like is not old man Whicker-Bill Comesaw, but Red Scarborough in the old Texaco filling station out on old Telegraph Road. As for C. Vann Woodward, whing-ding fiddle talk and Jim-Crow walk or not, he is the spitting image of the old Life and Casualty Insurance man (or maybe it was Tennessee Life and Casualty or the Industrial Benefit man), whose Willys-Knight you used to snag as if it were a gas-driven L&N switch engine. Anyway, anytime anybody from downhome sees you with either one of them and cocks an ear, popping or cutting his eyes (mostly without changing expression) and waits for you to answer whose is this one and what kind and whose that one, you can say: Filling Station Red. But from Kentucky this time, remembering the smell of the Texaco gas pumps and the inner-tube patching, remembering the free air hose and the old wooden grease rack with the galvanized oil tub, and also remembering the football games on the Atwater Kent Radio.

Murray is in full force here. Thus far, one wonders if he doesn't have the chops to write a great novel himself. But on the next page, Murray's lack of form rears its head again: where previously he had synthesized all his thoughts and sights into one song, he then breaks the song by reducing his subjects into quotes, politics, and questions about their proximity to racial relations in America. I would protest: now is the right time to practice what you have preached, as far as critique towards Brown, Baldwin and Wright, and arrive to race relations _through_ human observation, rather than run right to the subject matter at hand. I would even let the maestro cheat and self-deprecate by observing his running towards race relations as a subject with humor. But the effect is ruined: where we had once dwelled in Murray's eyes, we have tumbled out of them, into the world of journalists and rumors, of literary criticism and editorials, which is the world we inhabit now and will always inhabit, and is much more boring.

He never really recovers from this hang-up, though the "Tuskegee" chapter, possessing his development as a scholar in Tuskegee Institute, has interesting ideas. He almost makes a comeback in "Mobile", in a passage dominated entirely by dialogue, which he himself, as protagonist, alludes to the soloists exchanging musical statements:

> "Hey, man, me, man (_One trumpetlike statement begins_) \[...\]"

> "Hey!" (_this could be another trumpet, say with a parenthetical mute, or it could be an alto, or a getaway tenor_), "hey, but \[...\]"

> "Well, now" (_this is plunger style trombone jive_) \[...\]"

And so this is my one great complaint against Mr. Murray. All well and fine to be a little square - everyone is a little square, everyone has one pet peeve in something or other - but there is no edge to beauty; you have to go all the way. I think Faulkner wouldn't disagree with that. But if that's the sole great complaint, then there's hardly any at all; put in another way, it means, _You weren't great enough_. Which sounds to the rational many like nonsense. Albert Murray has done enough. "Omni-Americans" is still a unique and inspiring read today, almost as if nothing has changed. "Stomping the Blues" is a lovely piece of work as well, his love letter to the blues. But the mark of a great writer is not in their ability to publish novels, autobiographies, stage plays et cetera, but in the goodness of their writing. Albert Murray is a great writer.
