---
title: "Hirohiko Araki's JoJolion"
slug: 'hirohiko-araki-jojolion'
createdAt: '2022-10-19T03:08:21+0000'
seoTitle: "Hirohiko Araki's JoJolion"
seoDescription: "JoJolion is Hirohiko Araki's masterpiece."
tags: ['anime']
---

To the shock of many, the Baltimore State Attorney's Office recently moved to vacate <a href="https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/crime/baltimore-prosecutors-move-to-vacate-adnan-syed-conviction-in-1999-murder-case-brought-to-national-fame-in-e2-80-98serial-e2-80-99-podcast/ar-AA11PCQT" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Adnan Syed's conviction</a> of life in prison, in a trial over <a href="https://allthatsinteresting.com/adnan-syed-murder-of-hae-min-lee" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">the 1999 murder of Hae Min Lee</a>. Lee was last seen alive driving away from school to pick up her younger cousin and start her shift at a LensCrafters; her body would be found one month later in Leakin Park, the coroner determining the cause of death to be strangulation. Her ex-boyfriend, Adnan, had been regarded as obsessive, and, critcally, an acquaintance of Syed's had testified he had assisted him in concealing the body (the Attorney's office, however, has recently stated this testimony is under doubt). Syed was sentenced on February 25, 2000 - which means he has served 22 years in prison thus far. 22 years is a quarter or a fifth of his life. Regardless of his guilt or his innocence, his life so far has been plagued by a "curse" that determined the entire course of his life - a curse that drove him, irrationally, to kill his former girlfriend, or redirected its fury from the true killer onto him.

We tend to look away from the people in a case like this and dive straight away to the question of right and wrong, namely, how do we avenge the victim. People become "the deceased" or "the killer". In that sense, they lose from us the empathy we often accord to our neighbors.

Take for example <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_List_(murderer)" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">the story of John List</a>, whose father was a devout Lutherthan and who had devoted part of his life serving in the United States Army. He entered a fast track into the American Dream in his 30s, eventually becoming the vice president of a bank by the time he reached 40 and moving his family into a 19-room mansion.

But if one gazed into the inside of his life, all was not perfect. His marriage was not harmonious. After nine years of marriage, he discovered his wife had concealed her tertiary syphillis of eighteen years, contracted from her previous husband. Furthermore, her mental stability had become compromised by her alcoholism; their relationship could be called icy at best. Compounding this, List had been laid off after the closure of the bank. Having been taught by his father that a man has to be able to take care of his family, he kept the lay-off a secret and pretended to go to work, in reality interviewing for other positions and reading newspapers until his usual arrival home. All this was concealing the fact of his financial difficulties, culminating in the possible default of his mortgage which he attempted to postpone by diverting money from his mother's bank accounts.

List had decided, in the darkness of his soul, that there was no other possible solution. On November 9, 1971 he killed his wife, then his mother, then his daughter and younger son; later, he would kill his elder son, who defended himself, after the initial slaughter, almost as if in a Zen-like trance. (He would claim he truly believes his family went to heaven, and that he himself would not have gone if he committed suicide.) As the family was reclusive, the bodies would not be found until a month later. He erased his identity and started life over again as Robert Peter Clark of Denver, Colorado, initially as an accountant and eventually as a controller of a paper box manufacturing company, eventually returning back to accounting. He remarried and reinvigorated his faith in Lutheranism. He had not been found for 18 years. When he was finally convicted for the deaths of his family, he was imposed five terms of life imprisonment. I find myself pausing as I reflect on his story: there can be no forgiveness for familicide, but, wealth or not, there were a lot of miseries in his life. At his lowest point, he had been given curses on his marriage and wage-earning ability - and he took upon those curses as trials, to be burned.

Some people inherit curses from their family. <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murder_of_Dee_Dee_Blanchard" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Gypsy Rose Blanchard</a>, from birth, had been diagnosed with various chronic illnesses - muscular dystrophy, epileptic seizures, cancer - up to the age of 24. But none of these were true; they were all falsified. Gypsy was a victim of Munchausen syndrome by proxy; her puppet master was her mother, who lavished the attention and went through various hoops to ensure Gypsy appeared helpless, by, for example, using Botox to force Gypsy to drool in a specific way before they attended doctor visits. The person who was truly sick was her mother, Dee Dee Blanchard, a woman cursed with an insatiable appetite for sympathy and attention. The curse fully transferred to Gypsy on June 14, 2015 when her boyfriend at the time - whom she surreptitiously met on the internet, as Dee Dee prevented her daughter from having personal friends - killed Dee Dee Blanchard. Regardless of the morality of the case, she is serving her 10 years in prison as an accomplice to murder, where she purportedly exhibits the same manipulative behavior as her mother's as a result of having so morally bankrupt a role model.

And as the last curse to examine today, a "funnier" one depending on how you look at it, covers the <a href="https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2005/02/bachrach200502" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">2003 Goose Green Stabbing</a>. This incident covers the story of John and Mark, whose real names are hidden as they were minors when the events transpired, 14 and 16 respectively. In the residential area known as Goose Green in Greater Manchester, England, Mark had stabbed John, almost fatally, in the chest and the abdomen, though these two were once the best of friends. But their friendship rested on a lie, where John was the brother of a girl on the internet Mark had fallen in love with, who, as Mark discovered, would become murdered and gang-raped by a homosexual(?) serial killer and his associates. Mark, from the transcript, was devastated. But the girl, her killer, and his gang were all fake. They were invented by John, who would over the course of a few months create many more fictional women and characters to enrapture Mark's attention, culminating in a missive from a secret agent to stab John. But why go through all of these lengths? Was the motive to implicate Mark and profit from his doom, or for John to satisfy some martyr complex? The truth, as John tells it, was that he had experienced an intense loneliness in his life and, having met Mark, simply wanted to die. John had become obsessed with the internet and desired to die by the best friend he had made on it. No one - including me - can fathom how heavy a curse John's loneliness was to orchestrate his own death which, thankfully, was averted on time (he is seemingly much happier now). There was a brief moment of _true_ lunacy where it all made sense to him: trick my friend, through wealth, sex, and gratitude from Tony Blair and the queen (God save, et cetera).

### JoJolion

These are the true curses of Hirohiko Araki's "JoJolion". We typically attribute curses as extreme: either a severe physical defect or a mental defect bordering on madness. Death is considered a curse. This is not true: case after case, the true curse comes from _living_. A curse infects some aspect of our lives preventing us from achieving true fulfillment and, therefore, happiness. And curses simply _do not go away_. Those who are cursed simply pass the curse down.

The most famous curse involves the mythological House of Atreus. It begins with the trickster Tantalus, smilingly inviting the gods of Olympus to dinner. However, behind the door to his kitchen, he hatched a most vile plot - he slew his own son, Pelops, and attempted to serve his roasted remains to them. The gods, in their awesome wisdom, did not partake of this morbid meal, and punished Tantalus after death with a horrific punishment. But they did not entirely forgive him in life after; the uneaten boy would be resurrected and pitied by the gods, only for himself, in a fit of madness inherited by his father perhaps, to spill innocent blood once more. On and on descendant after descendant would take the lives of others and themselves, until holy Orestes confronted the deities himself after slaying his own mother.

Curses are inherently familial, because society and history are only constructed out of families. Every son and daughter must have a father and mother. The bachelor and spinster do not die alone.

The theme of family has always compelled Araki, from Jonathan's selfless sacrifice to the Crusaders' quest to save Holy Joestar; it even infects the smaller moments, such as Jotaro's silent tenderness towards Jolyne and Johnny's struggle to "get up to zero" from negative.

There are three families in "JoJolion".

The first is the Higashikata family, whose patriarch, in 2011, is Norisuke. The family is cursed by the physical disease called "Rock Disease", which transforms every generation's eldest son into rock. This physical curse demands a sacrifice; it is a known custom that the parents often sacrifice themselves for the son. But the reality is that they are infected by a second curse, that of their wealth. Combined, they weigh extremely heavy on their souls as they try to maintain their relevance while navigating through the modern world.

The second is the Kira family, whom Holy Joestar-Kira, formerly Holy Joestar, married into. She is the descendent of Johnny Joestar, the protagonist of "Steel Ball Run", who himself passed down a shadowy curse due to his desecration of a saint's corpse. In 2011, she suffers from an unknown disease that erases her memory and her ability to recognize commonplace things, including her son's face.

The third is the Kujo family, who is represented by Kiyomi Kujo. She is, to put it mildly, disorganized, negligent, though attractive. In a brief moment of lunacy, she coldly watches the drowning of her son, only to call for help twenty minutes later.

This - her neglect, her callousness, as a parent - too is a curse. This may even be the most important curse of all, underpinning much of the stories of "JoJo's Bizzare Adventure".

All of these curses would be inherited by sons and grandsons: Tsurugi Higashikata, Yoshikage Kira, and Josefumi Kujo, respectively. The curses would force in their victims the feelings of fear and desperation - Tsurugi's fear of death, Yoshikage's desperation for his mother's cure, and Josefumi's fear of being left alone, drowning beneath the rocks once more.

Yet the story transcends by Araki's introduction of technology that can transform the world over: the Locacaca fruit; or rather, a new species of the fruit.

The fruit has the power to remove curses. A baseball pitcher who had been so misfortunate to suffer a permanent injury in his shoulder, can instead transfer the injury to his jaw. An old man unable to walk may transfer his disability to his eyes. No one in the world needs to be crippled by their inability anymore. Indeed, this is a boon from the gods.

But the gods' boon is also a curse in disguise. It is a concealed dagger that takes from people their wealth and, occasionally, their unborn children. Worse, this dagger is held in the hands of another of the gods' curses: that of the Rock Humans, an alternate species to _Homo Sapiens_ made out of silicon rather than carbon.

We often see technology used by the tyrannical few to destroy the lives of the many; we observe how opium poppies are used to enrich the military of Afghanistan at the expense of the local populace and the peoples of the world over, through its creation of illicit trafficking and addicts. The Rock Humans are no different: they are at once ruthless pragmatists and evangelists, creating a philosophy out of the destruction of flesh-and-blood human beings for their own salvation. They share many traits with serial killers, who are neurotically obsessed with placing their own well-being and egos over their victims. Worse, we can never be sure who is a Rock Human and who is not; they have the same appearance as humans, only different circadian cycles.

We then observe that some curses can be wielded as weapons; in fact, one could say curses are designed to be exploited by humans. Would we be speaking of Pandora's Box if Pandora had refrained to open it? Humans in some instances are too curious without being cautious enough; we desire completeness in our knowledge and mastery of our surroundings, yet the cost always eludes us. Sometimes we are attracted to things seemingly innocuous - Joseph Joestar once inquired on an electrical outlet in the middle of the desert - and sometimes we are excited by things that we know are dangerous, such as Rohan's intrigue towards a woman murdered in a room by the side of a tunnel.

Stands are the physical manifestations of our intrigue and consequent mastery of the world through our knowledge. A stand at a given time represents our current "standing" in the world and within ourselves - they reflect the owner's strengths and weaknesses, including those weaknesses we attempt to cover over in our hearts. The stand is our current satisfaction with our beings and situations. Norisuke Highashikata IV has a weak stand without any ability to harm others; Norisuke in his heart of hearts is happy with his stand's helplessness, he is more than satisfied with its ability to discover new things and understand new people through "scents". In contrast, Ojiro Sasame's stand allows him to play with people as if they were puppets, his preference being to drown them under his surfboard; however, it requires him to literally be "over" them and to touch them. Ojiro, a man of no confidence whatsoever, a man plagued entirely with fears and anxieties, feels in his heart of hearts that so long as he is "over" someone, he can do whatever he wants with them, much as his girlfriend, an owner of the baseball team the Seiten Birdies, can do whatever she wants with him, much as the former Yoshikage Kira can hurt him as much as he wants, of whom Ojiro, despite having eaten his fingers down to their joints as a result of Kira, calls a friend. A stand's strengths are curses to its victims, and a stand's weaknesses are curses to its owner.

I believe Araki gradually understood his stories have evolved around the theme of curses. It begins with the curse of Dio Brando upon the Joestar family, Holy Kujo's incurable illness, the killer Yoshikage Kira's life of incredible fortune to then of extreme misfortune, the fates of Bucciarati's trusted men, and Enrico Pucci's rage for heaven. Of particular interest to Araki, a man deeply believing in justice regardless of anyone witnessing it, is the concept that the noble few can give the world dignity, even if just a little, even if as local as to their neighborhood.

This concept is crucial for understanding Josefumi Kujo, who is still the hero of the story, as I will explain later. A child of neglect, he has lived life fearing he will be ignored and thus is unable to form long-lasting relationships with anyone. He is saved, just a little bit, by Holy Joestar-Kira's destruction of a fatal blood clot in his brain after the drowning. This selfless act, as small as the cells of the body, gave him a lasting connection to her son, Yoshikage Kira, whom he would forge a tight friendship with, a friendship lasting to death.

Had Holy not saved him, he would not have assisted Yoshikage in her quest to save her, ineluctably involving them with the sinister Rock Humans who act as traffickers of the cursed Locacaca fruit. This quest on its face would lead to their demise - Yoshikage and Josefumi dying at the hands of the corrupt, charismatic Damo Tamaki and his cohorts. But the reality is that the quest would result in the birth of two incredible phenomenon: the creation of a new Locacaca fruit, which can exchange _lives_, not just limbs, and the birth of a new human being altogether.

The new Locacaca is secretly a curse. Actors debate endlessly and furiously on the cost of life for another's; they foreshadow the bloodshed occurring upon the fruit's mass-production. The new human, part Kujo, part Kira, is a blessing; Norisuke, who has been said to be treading the righteous path, sees him as such and is quick to lend him his surname and therefore aegis; the newborn shall be called Josuke Highashikata.

Holy's selflessness, ages ago, fruited into new life, and an unbreakable bond between two separate families, Kujo and Kira; Araki inextricably ties her image to that of Michelangelo's "Pieta" in Chapter 58. Josuke, while an entirely new being, has not, through the sheer power of the blood in his veins, forgotten the grace she had given him long ago. He persists in finding his identity and upon learning of the state of the world burdens his shoulders of the mantle Yoshikage and Josefumi left behind: he will save Holy's life from her cursed illness.

Yet the serendipitous protection of the Highashikata name carries its own burdens too, that of the resolution of the fate of Norisuke's grandson, Tsurugi. At the Highashikata's doorstep lies another demon in the soft flesh of a human's, Tsurugi's father and scion of the Highashikata wealth, Jobin Higashikata. A man accustomed to all the wealth and influence in the world yet craving more, a man furthermore whose wealth disguises the callous heart of a warrior, Jobin sees his son's illness less as a curse and more an obstacle that the family must overcome, his hands holding the sacrificial knife that shall be bloodied if need be. Jobin too is on a noble quest that aligns with Josuke's, yet his _hamartia_ is his blindness to the human life around him. Norisuke has been said to be on the path to righteousness, a path that may even involve suffering if required; Jobin is on the path to absolute victory at all costs, spitting in the face of fate. His is an admirable character many in the audience will sympathize with and even commend, yet his path involves shedding the blood of his enemies, his friends, and even his own father. This mercilessness is visually represented by his stand, a metallic warrior created from flames (sharing thematic similarities to Esidisi of "Battle Tendency"), whose ability is to concentrate an incredible amount of "heat" into a very small area, a subtle ability that nevertheless spares none of his enemies upon finding their weak point. He is the foil of Josuke, who believes wholeheartedly in Norisuke's righteous path and by nature spares life except for that of the Rock Humans whose every nature reeks of death for humans.

The ultimate antagonists of "JoJolion" are doctors, people whose very professions determine who lives and who dies. They are the foils of Holy Joester-Kira, also a doctor; where she protects life, they peddle in death disguised as blessings. Of particular note is their leader, the century-old Tooru who never ages and conceals himself as the deceased human Satoru Akefu. He also walks his own path, but it is a path that is not marked by "righteousness" or "victory". He describes himself as a rock:

> Atop the coastal cliffs! There is a "rock"...atop some other rocks... What that rock witnesses, is only "dreams and memories". Memories of the landscape from those scenic cliffs, clear skies, rainbows after storms, mist, the beacons of lighthouses, migratory birds and gulls, Glehnia plants... Only those dreams remain... "That which remains when it ends"... Defeat or victory mean nothing to that "rock" on top of those cliffs.

In so saying, his path is not a path of morality, it is a path of experiencing as many things as possible before that rock, himself, is shattered. Yet Tooru, as well as every other Rock Human, is unable to be truly free in human society, and so, despite eschewing morality, has to climb over the bodies of others to get that wonderful view of freedom. His stand, Wonder of U, has the near-invincible ability of disposing any person who pursues him or tries to obstruct his agenda - yet it too, like Norisuke's stand, is unable to assert itself through combat. Tooru himself is another adherent of fate.

Curiously left out of this write-up is the character Yasuho Hirose, who herself _shares_ the main character role with Josuke, though the events of the story do not necessarily involve her. She, however, is one of the youths of Morioh with a heart of gold, as Joseph Joestar opined at the end of "Diamond is Unbreakable".

Perhaps that is why she is so fitting for the plot. The aid of a stranger, even beyond sympathy, is a blessing in of itself. She also shows the secondary harm that the Rock Humans impose on people's lives.

We thus end on Araki's explanation of how he came upon the peculiar name of "JoJolion":

> The "lion" in the title "JoJolion" means things like "blessed thing", "evangelistic", and commemorative seal". It's a word from ancient Greek or something like that. By combining this word with "Jojo", I've meant for the title to signify the existence of the protagonist "Josuke" in the world. It's also used in the name of the tragic king in a Greek myth called "Pygmalion" as well as the Japanese animation "Evangelion", but I'm not sure if it has to do with the same idea.

### The tentatively titlted JOJOLANDS

In the author's note for the initial publication of the last chapter, 110, Araki stated the Part 9 will tentatively be called "JOJOLANDS" (the all-caps intentional, I assume).

So beyond this interpretation of "JoJolion", let us engage in a bit of geeky guessing.

We recall that Holy Joestar-Kira is not cured. Furthermore, it is impossible to breed another of the "miracle" Locacaca, at least as far as anyone in the Higashikata's immediate circle knows.

There has been a decent mapping of the "JoJo's Bizarre Adventure" stories pre-"Stone Ocean" and post - "Phantom Blood" to "Steel Ball Run" and "Battle Tendency" to "JoJolion". The shared elements between "Phantom Blood" and "Steel Ball Run" are the close relationships between a Joestar and a Zeppeli and Jonathan/Johnny's quest to overcome a personal hurdle begun since childhood. "Battle Tendency" and "JoJolion" share the domineering, world-conquering Pillar Men/Rock Humans.

The hope - or rather, prayer - is that "JOJOLANDS" is a remix of _the_ most famous story of "JoJo's Bizarre Adventure", not "Golden Wind", not "Diamond is Unbreakable", you know the one, the "RERO RERO RERO", the "POLLLNAREFFUUU!", the "most most most most most most most MOST TERRIFYING STAND OF ALL!!! ", the "HELL 2 U!", the "Good!", the one and only "Stardust Crusaders". The 2014 "Stardust Crusaders" anime adaptation, I shall add, may be the most watchable anime ever. It's just so fun.

My guess would be that Josuke, whose demeanor is closer to Jotaro's, whose soft-spoken, sensitive speech conceals the steely-eyed gaze of a natural-born fighter, searches for Holy's cure, possibly by traveling to the source of the Locacaca or looking for a Locacaca expert, much like Jotaro's quest to save his own mother of the same name. Furthermore, the fact that "JoJolion" ends with Lucy Steel resurrecting the plot line of the Saint's Corpse, the body of goddamn Jesus himself, leads one to think Diego Brando, or some other undead unholy SOB, will return back to the story as Josuke's natural nemesis, perhaps using the Rock Humans' research to unlock the potentials of immortality for himself.

Or, since Araki is such a chameleon, I may just be completely wrong.

All this to say, he is just too damn good at his job. He grew up with his audience, as an artist ought to. He is one of the few reasons why the word "geek" may not be so bad.
