---
title: "Beach Boys' Kokomo / Sloop John B / Take a Load Off Your Feet"
slug: '/beach-boys-triple-feature'
createdAt: '2024-08-23T01:58:26+0000'
seoTitle: "Beach Boys' Kokomo / Sloop John B / Take a Load Off Your Feet"
seoDescription: "For 2024, I'll talk about a song a day: this week, we're having a triple feature, talking about the Beach Boys' Kokomo (1988), Sloop John B (1966) and Take a Load Off Your Feet (1971)."
tags: ['music']
---

I've given myself the task of writing about one song a week for 2024 because, well, I think it'd be fun. You can see, by today's triple feature, that I'm in the thick of it and boy oh boy I'm grasping at straws.

### Beach Boys' Kokomo / Sloop John B / Take a Load Off Your Feet

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/fJWmbLS2_ec?si=Ad3IxNb9rMxPxSKf" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315" style="margin-top: 1em;" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/gx5PVjsRamk?si=W8R6WSFc2uLTreLz" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315" style="margin-top: 1em;" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/p4S120pl8Uo?si=TGjNFlIQQU4-HiCE" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Everyone loves "Kokomo" (1988), except music critics, which contradiction seemed to be picked up by [Stereogum in this quote: "People _hate_ "Kokomo"](https://www.stereogum.com/2149903/the-number-ones-the-beach-boys-kokomo/columns/the-number-ones/). I mean, it was a number one hit and was nominated for a Grammy.

As the same Stereogum article mentions, the most likely reason "Kokomo" is hated originates with band member Mike Love. The myth of Love's relationship with band member Brian Wilson, the guy from The Beach Boys every music nerd knows, can be summarized with ["Don't fuck with the formula"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smile_(The_Beach_Boys_album)#%22Don't_fuck_with_the_formula%22). Whether he said it or not, it's a fair thing to argue, particularly if you said it just _once_ in your lifetime only for journalists to associate it with you _forever_. And whether Mike is an asshole or not - he certainly reads like one - he was a member of the band and free to make his case. Not like Brian was in the best mental state either, what with drugs and his social circle of sycophants. So let's set aside Love, who, as it turns out, gave Brian [ample enough time to participate in the recording](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kokomo_(song)#Recording) (and it's easier to take Love's evidence on this considering Brian's consistent problems with time).

The second most likely reason "Kokomo" is hated are the lyrics. The brilliance of The Beach Boys was used to sell travel brochures. I'm sure Jamaica and Florida had nothing but praise for The Beach Boys' late hit.

I do use my words carefully though; "brilliance" and "Kokomo" go hand in hand. I love "Kokomo". In a way. I'm a heady guy, but words are an accessory to meaning, not necessary. That particular glide, "Aruba, Jamaica, ooh I wanna take ya; / Bermuda, Bahama, come on, pretty mama", is breathtaking. Even if you have no idea where Aruba or Bermuda actually are, the warmth and glisten of the bells and percussion are enough to transport you. Carl is seductive, but not in a romantic way; he encourages, rather than commends; he is confident, but not in a forceful way; his voice too conveys the warmth of the scenery, but none of its blistering heat and humidity. Most island songs are about passion, but The Beach Boys made a song that is typical of them: that of comfort and meditation. The interruption, from the repetition of "Jamaica" immediately into the first verse, helps this interpretation. It's almost as if the singer had awoken from a dream.

The first verse is unimportant. It's wallpaper. It's meant to remind you what the song is actually about. Yes, that sounds stupid, but, remember, it's a song you _hear_, not _think_ about. The image of a "tropical drink melting in your hand", though, is a good one, though I'm not aware of any drinks that melt (I assume all drinks are already in the liquid phase). Remember how I mentioned "Kokomo" is fairly sexless? "We'll be falling in love / to the rhythm of a steel drum band". The love has a context. It can only be had in the setting of luxury.

The chorus is the really crucial part of the song. Critics hate the song because it hammers one idea into your brain over and over, that is, it's fucking awesome to vacation. But, what an idea. A crash of the steel drums begins the chorus, mimicking the crash of waves. The band comes into full force, singing together the places they want to go to; after all, there is universal agreement and sharing of values in this paradise. You'll notice the chorus is overdubbed with a particularly raspy voice. It literally does not matter how ugly you sound, come on and soak in the sun. In fact, as beige as the song is, it's kinda swinging here. Carl is transcendent at the chorus's end: "We'll get there fast, / and then we'll take it slow, / that's where we wanna go, / way down in Kokomo", as if he were arriving to heaven itself, because, good Lord, we can all take a break.

Mike's outro for the chorus is perfect too: "Mar-tinique, / that Montserrat mystique", lending some exoticism and sexuality to the song. But not that much. Just a pinch. It's a perfect transition to the somewhat more steamy second verse.

I don't really need to go into the rest of the song. There's a pretty solid horn solo. Whatever. What's really important is the harmonizing of elements together, and how the band juxtaposes them. The song moves briskly, but the instruments, besides the percussion, are ignorable, and even the drums are fairly sedate and not played with much power.

Notice how often I mentioned the chasteness of The Beach Boys' songs. I aver that was one of their appeals. The Boys were boys in the best sense: they exuded innocence and wonderment at an endless world. Perhaps this is the reason why critics hated their pandering to commercial forces. Their contemporaries, The Rolling Stones, The Beatles, and The Who were fairly sexual. I mean, Roger Daltrey bathed in beans in one of their album covers. Fair enough, those guys were Brits, but the Boys were producing music in the decade of the Sexual Revolution, and they were, fascinatingly, little interested in the body of love and more on the spirit. It wasn't merely a concoction from Brian Wilson's mind, it was a conscious aesthetic the Boys participated in. Perhaps the music clung to the chasteness of the '50s. Perhaps. But I like to think, where Jagger was crying about his inability to get satisfaction, the Boys understood real peace and happiness comes from the harmony of the body and soul. That's probably the reason why no one dislikes The Beach Boys. Other bands elicit more passionate responses, but The Beach Boys are always highly respected on a variety of dimensions.

Sadly, we're not talking about the relationship between sexuality and The Beach Boys' music. That is a topic for a smarter and more discerning eye. No, we're talking about my favorite song on "Pet Sounds" (1966), "Sloop John B", which was an adaptation of The Kingston Trio's "The John B. Sails".

It's a perfect sequel to "Kokomo" because, of the songs in "Pet Sounds", it's just a fun song. There's not much more to it. If you weren't aware of the Trio's original, you probably sensed it on repeat listens of "Pet Sounds". Where other songs are fairly ego-centric, "Sloop John B" is just straight-up storytelling. You sense it had folk roots, based on some old American story.

That's why it's the most fun song. Other songs on the album you can meditate on and "vibe" with, as the youngsters say, but "Sloop John B" is sheer adventure and comedy. The glockenspiel really changes everything, mirroring here the shining of the sun that looks upon their endeavor. The lines, "We come on the sloop John B., / my grandfather and me," in the folk song, has the solemnity that seems to come from poverty and scarcity; here, it just seems like grandfather and grandson said, "Hey, fuck it," and went on a ride. That jangly guitar too lends a cheerful energy to the line, "Drinkin' all night, / got into a fight," and the succeeding lines, "I feel so broke up, / I want to go home", sound humbling rather than desperate.

The introduction of Mike Love's nasally vocal - see, Mike improved the older songs! - makes him sound anal-retentive as he remarks, "The first mate, he got drunk, / and broke in the captain's trunk; / the constable had to come and take him away." It's just funny. Notice how in the second verse the drums increase tempo and a soft horn is added, lending credence to the idea that things are getting out of hand, but not to the point of destruction, as is indicated by the band's humming at the end of the second verse. The "I wanna go home" succeeding the second verse is the sound of the band wailing, much as a fairly upset cat would.

And, of course, "This is the worst trip I've ever been on," changed from the grim original's "This is the worst trip since I've been born".

Brian didn't even like The Kingston Trio's original. [He wasn't even a big fan of the band](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sloop_John_B#The_Beach_Boys_version). Al Jardine had to convince him, present it in a "Beach Boys" way. Al did a bang-up job. The Beach Boys way, again, is not about the material part of the adventure, but the experiences picked up along the way, good and bad. It's about the learning that is necessary to being human.

And so, the final song of this retrospective, "Take a Load Off Your Feet", a cute song from the dark "Surf's Up" (1971). I love "Surf's Up", all of the songs are worth talking about, but I, hilariously, think of "Take a Load Off Your Feet" the most. The song is literally about taking care of your feet. Some advice: "I do them when I'm down in the tub / with avocado cream, they're take a rub; / they'll wrinkle like raisins if I stay too long, / I wouldn't want to do it wrong." Some more: "If you want to do the right thing for them, / just take a walk in the grass, / but don't you catch yourself falling / or stepping on a piece of glass".

Of note is how shitty the studio version is. I actually literally can't tell which verses are sung by Brian or Al. This was evidently recorded in Brian's home studio. There are artifacts in the music everywhere, and all the instruments sound fairly dull. Even the horn from Brian's Rolls-Royce sounds weak.

But...that's the hidden strength of the recording, oddly enough. The song isn't just about feet, it's about mortality. "They'll twinkle when you fall in love, / and put you up there when you jump above; / when you're on the spot, get 'em right under you, / one, then the other, too." The aforementioned mention of glass is not just a funny bit, the band takes the threat quite seriously, and you as the audience think of the horrors of the Achilles tendon being cut. The chorus says it all: "Take good care of your feet, / you better watch out what you eat, / take good care of your life / because nobody else will." It's a whimsical song where the band hums along, but in the background is an intense loneliness that comes from reflecting on our short time on this earth. The unconventional instruments - someone's car, a glass water container, footsteps - place the song in the sunny joys of our everyday life, but death lurks even here too.

That's the Beach Boys, man. When you stare at the shore, you see each wave, unique and individual, and they all die almost as soon as they are born. (OK, that's not true, as waves are actually created miles and miles away in the ocean and only gain shape as they approach the ground, but I digress.) There's a joy to waves, and there's a sadness to waves. The Beach Boys were able to encompass both, even if "Surf's Up" isn't as Beach Boys-y as possibly Mike would have wanted it.

So The Beach Boys, clearly, were a lot of things. I wish one of those things was, "a band that mostly got along". I don't know how most people feel, but I do think if the band held together and Brian was more available to his other bandmates, we'd be talking about a discography as wide and great as The Beatles'; considering my own take on The Beatles, perhaps even greater. But perhaps The Beach Boys were not supposed to be enjoyed too much in this world, and by the band's nature they had to fall apart. The end of the '60s really broke the American psyche and made us what we are today. I don't think this truly sunny band was able or should have been able to survive that period of time. The nice thing about art is that we can always have it and the moments it conveys, so let's just have the Boys' sunshine when we replay them.
