---
title: "Charles Mingus' Praying For Eric"
slug: 'charles-mingus-praying-for-eric'
createdAt: '2024-04-22T04:03:39+0000'
seoTitle: "Charles Mingus' Praying For Eric"
seoDescription: "For 2024, I'll talk about a song a day: this week, we'll talk about Charles Mingus' Praying For Eric."
tags: ['music', 'song of the week']
rating: 4
---

I've given myself the task of writing about one song a week for 2024 because, well, I think it'd be fun.

### Charles Mingus' Praying For Eric

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/XrUa7C1VAhg?si=i046FmKCOS-Yvhxv" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Happy birthday Charles. Alright, this is the real end of the birthdays.

I seem to be attracted to the crazy ones, and Mingus is as crazy as it gets. The PG version of Mingus's antics involves a young Fran Lebowitz being chased down through Downtown Manhattan by an angry Mingus, only for him to enter a truce _for the incident he incited_ by asking her out for lunch. Thirty minutes of pursuit, _while he had a show going on_. (I sadly could not find a clip.) The non-PG version begins with his "autobiography", "Beneath the Underdog: His World as Composed by Mingus", which had been described as pornography (indeed, it gets explicit in parts).

But if you really think on his autobiography - mind, I hadn't read all of it through yet - it's a meditation on evil, as from oneself, as from others, as emanating from heaven and hell buffeting the world with hatred. It begins with Mingus, as a spirit, looking sadly at his infant self, noting how the kid has no chance to make it, but he'll try, God bless him. A melancholy pervades the autobiography, that of someone who never belonged or felt comfortable in the world he was living in. This is black struggle; this is the struggle of someone who had been hurt by the world, who fears the world, and is uncertain whether he ought to hurt it back. He often did; let's not ignore that. But what makes Mingus so tantalizing as an artist is the undercurrent of vulnerability in all of his music, when it came to anger, politics, sexuality, society. He felt emotions enormously, paid for them, and paid the debt back, in song.

Look no further than one of the peaks of his career, "Black Saint and the Sinner Lady", whose liner notes, amusingly, were written by his psychotherapist. The title conveys it all: the image of Mingus's masculine, stoic, yet neutered self juxtaposed to his "female" lustful, flawed, vulnerable yet powerful self. Mingus, consummate bassist, plays the bass until his fingers are rendered raw, almost falling off the bone. The horns are about to give way like the lungs of a marathon runner, and the sax is a baleful banshee. The bass beginning "Mode D" is weeping. Of note is the piano intro of "Track C", which is reiterated in the album "Mingus Plays Piano" under "Myself When I Am Real"; it depicts all his pain and anxieties, replaying over and over again, as if waves on the shore. In "Plays Piano" he meditates; in "Saint and Sinner Lady", it is a chorus, a third-party acknowledgement that our characters will never find happiness.

His discography is never uninteresting because this man possessed immense contradiction. His "C Jam Blues" in Mingus At Carnegie Hall" is bursting with life and joy, as he often felt when he wasn't in a spell. "No Private Income Blues" from "Mingus in Wonderland" is very funny. And nothing is more amusing and tear-jerking than hearing Mingus moan in "Ecclusiastics" in "Oh Yeah": "Oh yeah, Jesus, I know; / 'cuz I know / I've been wrong, / yeah, I have." In the same track, his jealous side comes out: "Don't talk about my Jesus, / oh yeah, oh yeah, I know him." I think he genuinely believed in the power of Ellington's music, because nothing brought Mingus more joy than playing swing. (He evidently admired Ellington so much that the elder artist convinced him to return back for the recording of "Money Jungle". Calming down an angry Mingus seems like a divine task.) I'll call many artists genius, but Mingus to me is a capital-A Artist. You can't call him anything else because art was so crucial to his life and his perspective on it.

1964's "Town Hall Concert", recorded in the same year as the passage of the Civil Rights Act, succeeds "Black Saint and the Sinner Lady" by a year. This is a year after the 16th Baptist Church Bombing. This is a bitter Mingus, a 42-year-old Mingus, but one whose bitterness has given way to hopelessness and the wisdom that may come from it. Mingus could still swing, as evident by "So Long Eric (Don't Stay Over There Too Long)", his touching tribute to saxophonist Eric Dolphy, who was leaving the band to stay in Europe. The intro to that song is Mingus tugging at the bass's strings in typical passionate fashion, really sending his young friend off.

Yet after toasting Eric off, all that's left is pain, for black people, for the people of the world, from the conversations he held with Dolphy, leaving us with "Praying With Eric". I'll let Mingus introduce the track:

> This next composition was written when Eric Dolphy explained to me that there was something similar to the concentration camps once in Germany, now down South, where they separated the picketers - the green from the red, something like that - and the only difference between the electric barbed wire, is that they don't have gas chambers and hot stoves to cook us in yet. So I wrote a piece called "Meditations", as to get some wire cutters before someone else gets some guns to us.

he concludes, with nervous laughter from the audience. He continues, returning back to the bass, "Oh, they're going to get us - well, they'll try."

The winds (Johnny Coles on trumpet, Clifford Jordan on tenor sax) play an anxious, huffy tune; Dannie Richmond lightly taps the drums almost to the point of inaudibility, gathering in energy slowly as the composition continues; Dolphy, on flute, weaves through them like a wounded bird. After a drum roll by Richmond the music opens up; the tempo increases, and the winds join together, continuing Dolphy's melancholy tune. Finally even these winds give way to a mournful Jaki Byard on piano, playing a funereal solo eventually evolving into a duet with a baleful string (only Mingus is credited as a string, as a bass, though the timbre sounds like a violin). Dolphy then adds in his own thought, returning back to the motif of the flying bird, attempting to fly over the darkness and anxiety of the piano and strings.

Byard then opens up the music up again after a short medley, banging on the keys aggressively; from there, the band erupts into chaos, the winds panting like police alarms and Richmond entering a march, before the winds recur. This is when Mingus audibly enters in on bass, giving the music, after 11 minutes, a swinging rhythm, which Jordan reciprocates. The music is almost danceable if Jordon's sax weren't played so abrasively, still harkening to the angst building up in the composition since the beginning, accompanied by the most aggressive playing Richmond has had on the track. It's a reminder that dance can be violent, as seen in military music and capoeira.

Halfway through the track Mingus, Richmond and Byard enter a "jogging" beat, entering a walk-and-talk with the audience. Indeed, it's the happiest the music has been since the track began, approaching typical swing. We're almost lulled by this upbeat phase, if Byard, by the 15 minute mark, didn't relax the beat entirely, slowing it down to near-serenade levels. It's a brief reminder that music is a joy and can be a cure for all the sadness in the world, but only momentarily, only in sharp contrast to the sound of panic from the outside world.

It's this teeter-tottering, from happiness to madness, that makes the composition fascinating; the song reiterates, but it never returns in the same form. For example, compared to the police sirens of the prior part, the music enters another panicked phase with a fiery tenor sax from Jordan, which is so singular, compared to his halting performance in the previosu act, we interpret it as clarity and understanding, our protagonists finally - if music can have heroes - having collected enough of their senses to be inflamed. And yet this brief moment of passion, too, has to relent to the song's theme, the sudden slow-down characterized by an emphasis of Byard's piano, almost as if evoking the cool night of our anger.

I think this quality is why I find Mingus to be inimitable among 20th century composers: his oeuvre is never of one quality, they constantly vacillate. It's easy for the composer to dramatize, to sentimentalize, to exaggerate, in order to achieve an emotional effect. Mingus never felt that way; it's a naive way of thinking. His music has darkness, sure, but it possesses the self-awareness that all humans possess darkness, it is an essential part of our being. His music is lighthearted, but not so much he desires to keep the audience ignorant. He wants you to consider - actually, it may be more accurate that he wants you to feel as he does, concerned, worried, anxious and genuinely afraid over the course of the world, which does, indeed, contain good things.

And so the song, at the end, returns back to its beginning briefly, before lapsing into a final meditation between Byard, Dolphy and what sounds like a string I swear I can't identify at all.

We hear Mingus for the last time: "Eric Dolphy, on the flute." If there's anything good in the world, it's our recognition of excellence within other people.
