---
title: 'On Content'
slug: 'on-patrick-willems-everything-is-content'
createdAt: '2023-11-27T02:25:41+0000'
seoTitle: "On Patrick Willems' Everything Is Content video"
seoDescription: "Let's talk a little about content."
tags: ['film']
rating: 3
---

Christ, I never thought there'd be a day where I would defend the idea of "content". Then again, I'm not a Boomer; I have to grapple with the reality of content, as a Millenial. Because it's totally our fault. It's our generation that made making videos on YouTube a profession.

Forgive me a little for the philosophy that goes behind my thinking: whenever I try to defend a point of view, I tend to cite things that are popular and extremely visible, like "South Park". I believe that reality, after all, is reality; it is extremely difficult to hide, obfuscate and destroy. Season 17 of "South Park" can be described as Matt and Trey finally entering their "old" phase - as in, Goddamn, I am too old to understand this world and getting detached from it (which makes for great humor). You have that "Informative Murder Porn" episode where they openly admitted they do not understand the appeal of Minecraft. Then there is PewDiePie's (in)famous cameo at the end of Season 18's "#HappyHolograms", which episode has a music executive openly admitting that he has no freaking idea why his grandson likes PewDiePie.

Me too, Matt and Trey, me too. I don't get it either. Or rather, I do get it, but I pretend not to get it to look cool. That's the first part of the problem: how do you label something that you don't...get? For example, "Reality Television" is a huge misnomer, but it conveys exactly what the audience gets out of it: "Reality", or rather, a make-believe of seemingly realistic elements. No one who watches "Keeping Up With The Kardashians" has really pondered on a philosophical level what "reality" constitutes, but their hearts skip a beat with Chloe calls Kim a skank or something (note: I've never watched it) because it seems real, it seems like something they can carry back with them to their real life.

We will have to come up with a new term for "Reality Television", because things got very blurry with streaming. How do you...enjoy someone just..._doing_ things? Without a structure? Without a motivation? Without..._anything_? How do you wrap your head around it? You _don't_, or, at least, you _can't_ for the time being, until the people of the future figure out how they want to interact with it.

You just call it "content". Like, [this channel](https://www.youtube.com/@BadlandsChugs) of a guy chugging soda - and ONLY chugging soda - is content. [This guy](https://www.youtube.com/@BraveWilderness) getting stung by insects and having goofy faces, is content. [This person](https://www.youtube.com/@ChaseTheBro) playing "Elden Ring" constantly, is content.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hAtbFwzZp6Y?si=2cKFm9iMl4-KfaM-" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

And, to be honest, the videos Patrick Willems make, is content, strictly because I don't know how to categorize them. I _guess_ you can call them "video essays", in the same sense his video, "I Went To India To Learn About Bollywood", looks like something you would see on Medium. But that's the issue: I call Medium "content" too, because the essays there are bottom of the barrel and low quality (especially concerning technical topics like software). This is, perhaps, an issue I have with all terminology: when you give something a name, it also represents the extremes of the thing. When we say "human", we denote, unconsciously, the intellectual and spiritual heights of human beings, as well as their lows. When we say "art", we denote, beyond the actual individual members, the best and worst of art. I can't call the essays on Medium, well, essays, because essays are, I HOPE, things that are well-thought out, structured and edited...as the one I'm currently writing, hopefully, is. I've read Montaigne and Thomas Browne; I can't go back.

And, to emphasize, I do like Patrick Willems, as a writer, an artist, a film-maker, an entertainer; his videos, to me, are not essays, but they certainly look like pamphlets, i.e. a well-thought-out expression of a solidly biased opinion. Let's untangle this. The presentation of information can certainly be biased, but the _presenter_ does not have to be biased. This is the key difference. I know Willems' agenda right off the bat. He hates the word "content" and he will unpack the reasons why he hates it; having seen the video, most of his arguments come not from statistics or history, but from his gut. AND THAT'S FINE. I call certain videos of the channel [Folding Ideas](https://www.youtube.com/@FoldingIdeas) essays, namely the ones on technology and Internet culture, because, while Dan clearly has heavy-handed emotions on all of the subjects, they are extremely well-researched and fact-based. Even his video, ["Why It's Rude to Suck at Warcraft"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BKP1I7IocYU), while largely based on anecdotal evidence, is so interesting in of itself because of his attempt to navigate philosophically through the very concept of MMOs. _That's_ an essay: a reflection on the very real world we live in now so that we may try to understand our fundamental humanity.

I call him a content creator primarily because there's no specific thing I can point to that makes his videos interesting, _besides_ his personality. This is the heart of the issue at hand. Most content creators are personas who make content that demonstrate that persona. Why watch something? Is it because of the research went behind it, its "truthfulness"? its depth and the ideas it explores? the spectacle? its sense of humor? If consistent, I call these "journalism", "documentaries", "shows", "comedy". But if it's not consistent, I call it "content" - you're likely watching it because of the personality behind it. (This demystifies why Kevin Smith can be called a "content creator", rather than a filmmaker.)

This is, of course, the postmodern world we live in, that Gaddis feared.

I agree with most of Willems' conclusions, but I don't agree with his logic - that artists are being stifled in the world of streaming, yes, but that they suffer being called "content creators"? I feel he has it backwards - businesses have _always_ wanted to commodify entertainment, there has _never_ been a decade where they haven't, unless they thought it wouldn't make them money. They call it "content" because they don't know how else to brand it. Why do people want to watch Guy Fieri go through diners, drive-ins and dives? Why do people want to watch a documentary about marijuana? Why do people want to watch a dramatization of Jeffrey Daumer's life? Why do people want to watch a sequel to "Full House" called "Fuller House"? Why do people want to watch, Jesus, a live-action adaptation of "One Piece"? I. Don't. Know. I don't know. No one knows! No one knows why anyone wants to watch them! _BUT THEY DO._ That's the point of contention!

That's the real issue! The issue lies with the audience, not with corporations. The audience has been extremely receptive to this new format of entertainment. On a different note, they are also formalizing this format so it becomes predictable. This is another of Willems' gripes: we, Millenials, Zoomers etc., as we speak, are solidifying the cadence, the matter, the _expectations_ of this kind of content, so that these too, YouTube, TikTok, whatever, will become the TV of the future which creators can enter safely though not wildly successfully. This is not surprising. This is the case with every industry: minimizing risk and maximizing investment. And the audience is content with this content. If you want to blame someone, you have to blame the audience.

To tell the truth, the primary trigger for writing this essay came from one thing Willems said: "In the US, mainstream cinema and TV exist entirely in the confines of capitalism. Everything is for-profit; there are no national funds for filmmakers as there are in other countries," which didn't pass the sniff test. However, he is correct: there is no American equivalent to Screen Ireland or the Malta Film Fund, which are directly funded by their governments. Except that the National Endowment for the Arts [does seem to provide grants for films](https://www.arts.gov/impact/media-arts), and there do seem to be [examples](https://www.arts.gov/stories/blog/2021/six-documentaries-supported-national-endowment-arts-stream-now). Then there are the [incentives](https://www.nyc.gov/site/mome/industries/tv-film.page) [given](https://mafilm.org/production-tax-incentives/) [by](https://www.georgia.org/press-release/georgia-council-arts-distribute-35-million-competitive-state-grants) individual states for film-making. Granted, there are few of them, based on my cursory research, and there aren't many cases of _direct_ funding for films beyond private non-profits (of which there appear to be many). But this still beggars the question of whether the statement is disingenuous, and whether he is referring only to films _he likes_.

At least Willems had the sense of humor to reflect that this whole reaction was a bit like the "old man yells at clouds" meme. Because it strikes me, partially, as being that: a reaction from someone who loves movies and loves to think about movies. Tellingly, the end of his video asks the hyperbolic question: Who is killing cinema? The other part is that we live in a genuinely new world where our consumption of entertainment has changed dramatically, and is changing dramatically. I've preferred the response RedLetterMedia (whose "content" I would safely call "reviews", for that is what they are, except when they do trivia game shows about Marilyn Manson and the Bloodhound Gang, which is content), which is, Let's wait and see. Because, again, you can't hide from reality. You can't give bad products forever, otherwise they won't give you money, to make more bad products. And if they do, we have to redefine what is good. Because that's where the true agent of change lies.
