---
title: "Mozart's Der Holle Rache"
slug: "/der-holle-rache"
createdAt: "2022-01-15T22:15:37+0000"
seoTitle: "Mozart's Der Holle Rache"
seoDescription: "We discuss the \"Der Holle Rache\" aria of Mozart's/Schikaneder's Magic Flute."
tags: ["music"]
---

The Queen of the Night's second aria is extremely cruel. If her daughter does not succeed in her plot for personal vengeance against the sage Sarastro, then she will forever reject her. The Queen's attendants coldly watch Pamina buckle over in torment.

But what heightens the cruelty is the music itself. The famous first coloratura, the elongated "nimmermehr", translates to "nevermore". Concerning the violins in this passage, I've always called Mozart Zephyr, for he had this miraculous talent for producing sounds out of instruments that feel like breezes of wind. These winds, which are almost like magical servants accompanying the singers, dance around the Queen in both arias, as if they acknowledge her as their supreme sovereign (and this is indeed the case given the singer's performance). The elongated "nimmermehr" then has a magical quality - the physical performance needed to sing that coloratura demonstrates that the Queen truly has the willpower to abandon her daughter to the end of time, and the orchestration surrounding the Queen enhances that awesome, mysterious "nevermore", as if the Queen were visiting her daughter with the curse of a god. At the end of the passage the music ebbs away, because the Queen has made her point and with ultimate, fatal strength; the winds die, no longer attracted by the Queen's strength, only to surge upward rapidly again as she summons her voice solidifying her position, taunting her daughter "Verstossen sei auf ewig! Verlassen sei auf swig!" (Disowned be you forever! Abandoned be you forever!). This is a character who is self-assured of her power and clearly enjoys using it, upon others, for the sake of herself, and the music is swooned by her performance, moving to even more rapid heights.

"So bist du mein, meine tochter nimmermehr!" The repetition of words occurs often in Mozart's operas, which is again part of his incredible ability to make all phrasing flighty. At once there is a dramatic pause and a dramatic emphasis at once, the "Then you are my, my daughter nevermore!" unleashed at the audience that is fresh every time one hears the aria anew. This is my guess - these innovations are apart from the libretto itself, to give the music more of a musical quality. For postmodern literature, where Joyce's and Celine's innovations have not ceased their rumbling, Mozart's ideas on the musical quality of prose itself still inspire.

We merely play at art; Mozart is a true artist. He understood that there is an amorality to art - it is the artist's role to discover and heighten passions. Despite the grim libretto, the music _soars_, it is no less luminous and flighty as the Queen's first aria where she appears from thunderclap and tells Tamino to "\[not\] tremble, my dear son," an angel sent from heaven. For this is the Queen's moment - regardless if the audience is against her or not, the music strengthens her characterization and makes something memorable out of her awful strength, and in all its terribleness we are taken away by it, thus representing the irrepressible, invincible night.

There is a difference between depicting villainous actions and believing the actions should go unpunished. In fact, there is a whole spectrum: punishing it, denouncing it, depicting it plainly, as a kind of catharsis, and then depicting villainy and praising it because it is villainy. There is a balance that the artist must maintain, of course, otherwise the artist risks depicting nothing except a caricature, a grostesque mockery of itself.

I was stunned by the magnificant evil of the Queen's second aria. When one hears it, one notices immediately its beauty - that is, after all, why Amazon ran it in a commercial for its music streaming service without regard to its actual lyrical content. It's not comically mean either, in the same vein Bartolo's "La Vendetta!" is in "The Marriage of Figaro"; the Queen's threats of hell's vengeance and death and despair are taken seriously, and her aim is not petty. Her cruelty is not directed at everyone and everything, as seen in her first aria, but specifically at Sarastro and, as a conduit to him, her daughter. Those beautiful "sei auf ewig's" really convince the listener her curses will go on forever. That contrasting beauty and hatred, without author censorship, with full sincerity, without any attempt to undercut or demean the character, are what makes this aria so _unique_, even in the canon of modern music. For that reason, it enhances the mystique and power surrounding that character, thus ensuring they live on in the human mind as immortal.