---
title: "Kanye's Donda"
slug: "/kanye-donda"
createdAt: "2021-09-18T22:37:06+0000"
seoTitle: "Kanye's Donda"
seoDescription: "Welp, Donda is here."
tags: ["music"]
---

Well, say what you will about Kanye, but at least he's interesting.

I already gave <a href="https://weebforce.com/kanyes-awkward-albums-2010-to-2016" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">my thoughts</a> on Kanye's most pivotal part of his career - arguably the best part of his career - and to follow up: I was somewhat right, Kanye isn't really in "Donda" all that much. For the first three tracks he doesn't say much, and when he does say something it doesn't really stand out all too much. He seems to allow the music - repetition of phrases, the instrumentals, guest vocalists - do more of the talking for him, which is ok, it makes for an interesting divergence from the rest of his oeuvre.

Can we say now that Kanye has finally entered "stadium Kanye"? I don't recall the release for "Ye" and "God is King", but I feel like he's premiered all of his post-2015 music in venues for fashion shows, which make for a better place to listen to his cavernous beats and lofty words. Unfortunately, stadium music has a negative reputation - it's typically associated with, like, Imagine Dragons or Mumford and Sons, who are kinda like the Nickelback of the 2010s. Most people will listen to the music from subpar speakers or subpar headphones, and not in the desirable environment, so beyond the feeling of being overwhelmed by the music (on a physical level) there's not much more to the music on an intellectual or philosophical level.

It's kinda sad because I wanted to listen to Coltrane's "Ascension" today and then, for whatever reason, I wanted to see what "Donda" was about. "Ascension" is assuredly a spiritual album, in concept and in fact in comparison to "Donda" - it is at once a physical connection to a God, but it is also a depiction of a profound struggle connecting to that God, almost an equal to Beethoven's 131st opus. There is a philosophical backbone to "Ascension" as the music powers through dark valleys and mountain peaks, stretches of confusion and brief moments of clarity. To me, "Ascension" is a clear demonstration that you can make a theological album that also _never_ mentions God or gods; the concept of God is felt first, and then by analyzing the composition of the music you come to understand the ideas behind it.

Holy shit. I just realized there are 27 tracks on this album. This is no "Donuts" - all of these tracks are long; I mean some are interludes, but I'm staring down 3-5 minute long tracks.

Another album I thought about while listening to "Jail" and "God Breathed" is Marvin Gaye's masterpiece "Here, My Dear". I began listening to it a few weeks ago and I expressed the same admiration for the music Robert Christgau had - it was an entirely genuine album, genuinely struggling to understand love and its relationship to divorce. Was Marvin Gaye kind of an asshole? Oh, absolutely - but even then, when he sings against his former wife, his pain is genuine, even though his logical argument is lacking. There's even a substantial amount of analysis in "Here, My Dear", the best coming from "Everybody Needs Love". It's hard to tell if Marvin is upset or joyous while returning over and over to the theme of needing love in that track, but I personally get devastated when he sings "And my father, he needs love; that's true baby, and I need love too." Given his relationship with his father, and saying even someone like his father, evidently a rather cruel person, needs love, really emphasizes how someone like Marvin, a person like you and me, absolutely needs love. When it comes to the _need_ for love, there are no winners or losers, no one comes out satisfied ("I'm still with you, dear, 'cause I need your love"); there is only the _need_, forming the foundation of our being. It's a profound statement, actually, in a world that typically pins love as pleasure.

"Here, My Dear" is probably the exemplar Kanye should have tried to hit when constructing "Donda". If the concept for the album is his fraught relationship with the external world, especially his celebrity and his divorce from his former wife, and the musical concept is spiritual (using a choir and themes from Chicago house), then the contradictory blend of cynicism and innocence in "Here, My Dear" is perfect for Donda. The cynicism comes from the external world and the innocence comes from the internal, the Biblical as it manifests within Kanye. Also, "Here, My Dear" is like 12 tracks long. (Each track is long and funky, but the idea behind each song is very clear.) Again, no album should be 20 tracks long unless it's "Donuts". Or "Supreme Clientele". Or "Madvillainy".

That's...about it for "Donda". There's not much to say except Kanye has really interesting ideas for a pop album, but there's no precision in this one, in terms of the musical or narrative concept (to have a good album, you need to have one). I like the idea that Kanye allows the music - the feeling, the progression of the music - to occasionally take the center stage, but... it's certainly an idea that someone, especially black musicians, have explored and perfected. Marvin obviously in the example above, but also Sly Stone in "There's a Riot Goin' On", hell even Kassa Overall in the recent "I Think I'm Good". That's where things get weird: I feel like I should logically be saying this album sucks, but I feel he's trying to convey something unique through the music that I can't put my finger on. "God Breathed" is a good example - there's something about the imagery and the idea of God breathing on a piece of music, though the execution itself is lacking. Again, referring to "Ascension", God _did_ breathe on that; although Kanye is convinced God did breathe on "Donda", I myself am not, and some of the evidence against it is that there are _a lot_ of guest singers - this is as populated as "Late Registration"! - some of them certainly scoundrels, and whom, if there is a God, that God would not speak through.

So yeah I'd give him an A for effort.

### Further thoughts

1. God Jay-Z is bad in this album.

2. It's disappointing because you can say so much more by saying less. This isn't even a concept alien to Kanye - the guy made "New Slaves", which ends with a lovely extended outro drowning in the singer's prior rage.

3. Even a notable songwriter like Lou Reed created "Metal Machine Music". Well, Lou Reed also collaborated with Metallica, but you can't deny how interesting that is, at the very least.

4. It's weird how the careers of Kanye and his contemporary Fiona Apple have diverged. Fiona undertook eight years - and very little visibility - in creating what to me was an instant classic, "Fetch the Bolt Cutters". I don't think "Bolt Cutters" is her best work - there is something genuinely magical about "Idler Wheel" to me - but lyrically and musically it's perfect. As much as I bristled at "Shameika" originally, it now appears as a perfectly-told story to me. This is also in the context that "Idler Wheel" (2012) and "Yeezus" (2013), the absolute greatest entries of both artists' oeuvre, were released roughly around the same time, at the age of 35 or so.<br/>Furthermore, it doesn't need to be said how deeply personal "Bolt Cutters" is. And how many awards it won by music industry elites. I dunno, under that context it does make me think Kanye knows what he's doing, and he intentionally lowered the goal for this one.
