---
title: 'FLCL'
slug: 'flcl'
createdAt: '2023-09-25T22:44:08+0000'
seoTitle: 'FLCL'
seoDescription: 'What is left to say about FLCL?'
tags: ['anime', 'animation']
rating: 5
---

Imagine me, dumbfounded, for five minutes, at the prompt of, "What is there even left to say about _FLCL_?"

On March 23, 2003, "Spirited Away" won the Academy's award for Best Animated Feature Film, only the second ever given in the Academy's history. For some, this comes to some confusion, as the film's original release was on July 20, 2001. But the English translation (affectionately called "dub" by anime fans) premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 7, 2002. To give perspective at how momentous an event this was - and _momentous_ is even an understatement - in the subsequent 19 awards, 2004 to 2023, no Japanese animation will win. All of Ghibli's suceeding films, except "Ponyo", and Isao Takahata's "The Tale of Princess Kaguya", linger in the nomination stage. "Your Name" gets no mention. "Demon Slayer: Mugen Train", which surpassed "Spirited Away" as the highest grossing Japanese film, also is snubbed. (Rightfully so. But a topic for another day.) It's possible Miyazaki, who survived the bombing of Utsunomiya, felt a tinge of pleasure at legitimizing an artform exclusive to his native country, which had become a global superpower after the end of the Second World War in the short span of thirty years. Or, he felt nothing. Miyazaki's "Don't give two fucks" philosophy is well-documented.

The road to "Spirited Away" was long and perilous and filled [often with porn](https://www.awn.com/mag/issue3.4/3.4pages/3.4patten.html). Miyazaki had seen it all. The golden age, heralded by Tezuka, was characterized by bottomless human evil matched with cautious optimism, as confronted by Japanese society at the time, which had many war criminals wearing civilian clothes hiding in plain sight. This is the real world Nausicaa and Sheeta derive from. The silver age begins around the time of the releases of "The Wings of Honneamise" (1987) and "Akira" (1988), where animators had abandoned optimism, while expanding the emotional palette of the genre, usually through the lens of science fiction. This is the time of "Porco Rosso" and "Princess Mononoke". And the bronze age begins somewhere with "Spirited Away", with political commentary largely left behind for...well, storytelling, often in modern settings. This is the age of Haruhi Suzumiya. Dear God, I was born too late.

I kid (a little), because the bronze age is anime's greatest age. Most of Satoshi Kon's career ("Millenium Actress", "Paranoia Agent") are in this era. And so too is, of course, the subject of this discussion: Kazuya Tsurumaki's "FLCL".

Because "FLCL" (pronounced "Foo-lee Coo-lee") is as critical to anime as "Spirited Away" was. The 2000 "FLCL" (debuted in the US in 2003) came right off the heels of "Evangelion", possibly _the_ most influential mecha anime, precisely for the reason that it's not really about mecha. "FLCL" is a spiritual bridge between the dark sci-fi of the '90s and the relatively lighter '00s. There's a robot, but no one is philosophizing about the ghost in the shell. There are action scenes, but they're largely tongue-in-cheek (even in the relatively dark second episode, "Firestarter", where the robot does not punch, kick, slap Naota, but flicks him as if to say, "You bozo"). There's not really an antagonist, except...people being shitty people.

On that topic, the most innovative aspect of "FLCL" may be that it doesn't have one protagonist. Naota is _sort of_ your traditional protagonist, though he lacks control in nearly every situation. He certainly has the most substantial character arc. No one is sure, [including Kazuya Tsurumaki](https://www.evamonkey.com/writings/thomas-owen-kazuya-tsurumaki-amusing-himself-to-death.php), on how "FLCL" was made, so it's astonishing that the series becomes a social drama about human shittiness: human indifference, human callousness, human boredom, and the human need to connect. Naota is just the pivot point.

By virtue of the fact that he is so incredibly horny (in multiple ways, actually). The clever thing about "FLCL" - and again, it's hard to call anything clever when we're not sure what Tsurumaki or the writer, Yoji Enokido, were thinking - is that its perspective is almost entirely through the lens of male sexuality. Before you can dispute: the giant dick of episode 5. So. If I may continue. The real core of "FLCL" is Naota's lack of a suitable male figure in his life. His father is an idiot, and his brother recently left for a Major League career in America. In a tell to the audience, his brother sends him a postcard with the brazen message: I got a girlfriend in America. He relies on his brother as a guiding figure, and his brother is going around schmoozing girls in exotic countries. Naota tries to seek stability in Mamimi Samejima, his brother's ex-girlfriend, which leads to...all kinds of Freudian issues. He is seeking a male figure in the female figure of Samejima who, in Naota's eyes, was his brother's sidepiece, so it's kind of like confirming that his brother is never coming back, equal to capital-D Dead. Adding on to this is that Samejima is a bit of a loser and misses his brother as much as Naota does. So here is our character: he is questioning his masculinity, he is unsure about the very concept of masculinity, and he is seeking masculinity through his sexual attraction to Samejima, who was once the sexual object of his true authority figure. No wonder he wants to be a grown-up - a grown-up is already made up, while he is in the painful process of making himself up. (You see echoes of this in William Gaddis' work, "The Recognitions", where Otto wishes to be an old man.) And you get most of this information in that first, truly beautiful scene of the series, where Samejima lectures Naota on how to swing the bat.

This is where Haruko Haruharu comes in, who sets Naota's sexuality ablaze. I mean, she's in a nurse's outfit at one point in the show, for Christ's sake. Haruko is almost the flip of Samejima: she is emancipated from society, largely because she is a space alien. (What with her casual behavior and hair style, she can also be seen through the lens of his brother's American girlfriend.) She embodies both masculine and feminine aspects, confident in her superheroic physical strength and in her sexual appearance. Naota seeks within her his brother's authority, but, as he interacts more with her, he clarifies how he truly feels about women and sex. The series culminates in his, finally, taking agency: he kisses Haruko, at once solidifying his masculinity and his confidence around the opposite sex, asserting his place in the world, and getting over Haruko, because she's a giant, intergalactic asshole.

Contrast him with Commander Amarao, the man with the fake eyebrows. The foil of Naota, he himself encountered Haruko early in his life and never really got over it. Instead, as he brags, he's got a car and a house now, so he's a grown-up and doesn't need alien sidepieces. But he's ultimately impotent: no matter how many threats or guns he throws at Haruko, she handily defeats him at every turn. And, at the end, he even gets upstaged by a kid. Being a grown-up is overrated.

Which is the theme of the series overall. The show's real strength comes from its characters, who, honestly, after a decade of watching anime, are the most complex I've ever seen. I'll leave off Samejima - the greatest female character ever - for this review. You have the daughter of the mayor, Eri Ninamori, the second greatest female character ever, pretending to be mature and keeping it all together for the class' production of "Puss in Boots", while her father is fucking his secretary. At every turn, she puts out an air of being smarter than Naota (which adds onto his ongoing issues with his masculinity). Yet at the climax of episode 3, we find that she's not above cheating into getting things her way - much like her father. Ninamori tries to project an aura of being in control over her life, but her idea of control is based on the authority figures surrounding her, who are shitty people. So why emulate shitty people when you can be, you know, yourself?

And that really is the legacy of "FLCL": the message of being yourself. To date, it's still one of the oddest anime ever. A famous scene in episode 1 is animated through manga panels. Episode 5 has a direct reference to "South Park". There's a weird recurring gag with shower caps. And, again: the constant dicks. You can point to a more surreal or more incomprehensible anime, but "FLCL" is truly incomprehensible in how comprehensible it is.

I would be remiss without talking about Kazuya Tsurumaki, the director of the series, who hardly talks about himself and seems not to know he exists. Tsurumaki will be the greatest visionary in anime after Miyazaki kicks the bucket. His "Dragon Dentist" is essentially a modern take on "Princess Mononoke"; I prefer the former to the latter, honestly. More than the frenetic pace of "FLCL", he is known for his character, or human, oriented approach to scenes. He's certainly much more of a psychologist than Miyazaki is. A particularly memorable scene in "Dragon Dentist" involves a female character whetting her sexual desire through the illusion of someone, as if she stumbled upon an oasis after a long trek through the blistering desert. The end of the film has Bell recount an extended anecdote of a horse, mirroring his futility as a person. In "Diebuster", the sequel to, of course, Anno's "Gunbuster", Lal'C rages in the cockpit of a planet-sized mecha, as large as the ego she has cultivated throughout her life she can't escape from in the peak of her grief. From the dialogue to the art, there's no director I can think of who loves his characters as much, even if he despises them (Katsuhiro Otomo, of "Akira" fame, is a close second).

It's a shame, then, that Tsurumaki has been saddled with the "Evangelion" tetralogy. I'm somewhat at a loss of why he continues to helm Anno's leftovers. I'm generally at a loss as to [why he remains in Anno's shadow](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/rikki/evangelion-3-0-1-0-booklet-interview-kazuya-tsurumaki-5), which is not particularly cast long. It's not a good look for an artist that people name just the one work, "Evangelion", as their contribution to art. And I would argue that "Evangelion" captures a moment more than an aesthetic or a feeling, for the reason that the series is all over the place in terms of story and tone. As far as anime goes, Tsurumaki has proven himself to be the stronger artist because he has wrung more emotion out of that medium. He has not had to rely on experimental tricks, which by their nature are jarring, to show a character's anxiety, fear, disconnect from the world. There are also actual recurring themes in his oeuvre that is not just angst. Unless he decides to do a "Cutie Honey" sequel, I hope this is the last of Anno's leftovers. I would be happy to see him do anything, that is not fucking "Evangelion". He deserves to show whatever he wants to the world and the world deserves to see it.

For these reasons I always lump "FLCL" together with "Spirited Away", as I have done in this essay. They've both certainly suffered similar fates: no one really...learned anything from either anime. No one cares much at all for Miyazaki's animation style, and no one cares much for Tsurumaki's storytelling. They both are bridges from a darker past. Chihiro wading into the dark edges of the festival in the beginning of the story harkens to a doubtful, anxious '90s; her rapid ascent into the clouds with Haku, into the new millenium as it were, is a hell of a character arc. In that same sense, Naota carries so much of Shinji Ikari's, and Hideaki Anno's, neuroses, only to exorcise himself of them through nonsensical robot fights. And, I can say with supreme confidence, both are masterpieces in the genre.

So now there is absolutely nothing more to say about the "FLCL" series, and people may watch it more than they need to talk about it. Because that is what masterpieces deserve: to be watched.

### The FLCL sequels

Alright, let's talk about the "FLCL" sequels, or rather, the idea of a "FLCL" sequel, as the existing sequels themselves are not very interesting. I will say, "Alternative" is better than "Progressive", and both are better than the recently released "Grunge", which, I have quipped, is basically "The Force Awakens" for "FLCL".

This question might help: how would you do a sequel for "Diebuster"? "Gunbuster" and "Diebuster" exist at opposite ends: where I may call "Gunbuster"...dry, "Diebuster" is certainly energetic and nearly juvenile. There could not be a more unconventional sequel in "Diebuster". So, how do you continue a series which cares so little for continuity?

The basic idea is there: adolescents are trained to pilot giant robots that wage war within the universe. "Gunbuster" is all plot; Takaya and Amano are little-filled in, but Araki makes clear the toll of the war has on human life as we know it. "Diebuster" is all about the characters; indeed, the war little matters except in how our characters see themselves through it. With the sequel, some fundamental aspect of the storytelling changed. I guess one approach would be to concentrate on the science-fiction angle and get really into detail about the surrounding world. Maybe you could do a story from the perspective of the aliens? Again, for a series that isn't conventional, you have to continue to be unconventional, while not losing the semblance of a story.

You can see this angst with the sequels of "FLCL", where the creators kinda tried new things in half-measures. "FLCL" isn't really about the animation, the music or the art style, which may be called, as the teens say, the "vibe", or, at the least, you can't really replicate that. If you want the "vibe" or "-ism" of "FLCL", you should watch the original.

The sequels toy with switching up the story, the characters and the setting, but they never confidently commit to it. For example, both female leads of "Progressive" and "Alternative" are dramatically different from Naota. By their sheer existence they subvert the heavy-handed male sexuality of the original, while adding in thoughts on female sexuality. But there's no commitment to it. There's a kinda interesting kinda-not-really-sexual relationship with the latter protagonist, Kana and her friend Pets. And both series treat sexuality with complete sterility. If there's anything rock n' roll in "FLCL", it's that sex is gross. And awesome.

That's certainly an issue with both "FLCL" and rock nowadays: the lack of sexiness. Perhaps the dirty little secret is that, as you get older, you kinda get over sex. It becomes less mystical. It becomes less scarce. It becomes, well, just fucking. And then you get nostalgic about the times when you used to have sex, or had the mentality for it. That's basically the message I got from [the recent Rolling Stones tour](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mEC54eTuGw): "Ah, we were young once, and had sex, before we got grandchildren." The issue is that "FLCL" and rock got older, and you can't get older without self-awareness.

That being said, I would LOVE a "FLCL" from a feminine perspective, which to me is, like, what, queefs and menstruation and shit. I'd recommend Naoko Yamada, but I hated "Liz and the Blue Bird". It might be very difficult for such a thing to be made in Japan, which still has fierce conceptions about femininity. I mean, hell, the only director I could name was Yamada.

"Grunge" is kind of interesting because it explores the universe a little bit via alien gangsters, but, again, it doesn't go too far with it with its sterile The Thing stand-in. I want Haruko to struggle with a squirting tentacle monster, damnit.

Which is to ask, why is Haruko in these damn shows at all? Back to our "Gunbuster" comparison, the sequel begins with a complete blank slate. "Progressive" toys with having a replacement, but she's too boring as an intergalactic space agent. That Haruko came from space is not an arbitrary decision - why is it commonly said women are from Venus? She's an Amazonian with different morals and values from us mere humans.

Which is to say, Haruko is absolutely a product of the male gaze. In youth lingo she would be a "dommy mommy": a strong caregiver that furthermore sexually gratifies her...err, wards. Haruko doesn't have much of a place in a female-oriented cast because she is meant to contrast directly with men. And yes, I know female sexuality is more than queefs and blood; you couldn't create a slinging-dick banana-hammock male equivalent of her. You'd need someone who elicits that same irrational reaction out of women as Haruko does for men. I'd imagine this would take a lot of work because I can't imagine this mythical male, beyond Fabio.

So "Grunge" and "Shoegaze" gave up and returned back to the man. That doesn't mean they outright don't work. For example, "Grunge" has two male leads and one female. Wouldn't a love triangle be welcomed? "Shoegaze" has the male lead in a more-or-less stable relationship. You could do a lot with that premise. But both falter; they have no intent beyond fulfilling the token quota before moving onto the epic sci-fi plot. Which, to reiterate, is completely secondary to the actual plot.

I don't know. No series has as many failures, in so short a timespan, as "FLCL". I don't think you couldn't make a decent sequel, but it's hard to, especially as Adult Swim, which has male-oriented programming, is commissioning them. Keep in mind Tsurumaki's directorial debut is the latter catalog for "Kare Kano". You have to approach the series as a comedy first and as action/drama second. It's funny, as most of Anno and Tsurumaki's strengths come from comedy, from the more awkward interactions in life. Directors of action are dime a dozen; no one talks about Mamoru Oshii anymore. The only hope is that the sequels have made one person laugh: Tsurumaki, as he skips to the bank.
