---
title: "Hiroyuki Imaishi is the establishment"
slug: "/cyberpunk-edgerunners"
createdAt: "2022-10-19T03:08:21+0000"
seoTitle: "Cyberpunk: Edgerunners"
seoDescription: "\"Cyberpunk: Edgerunners\" is hot garbage."
tags: ["anime", "animation"]
---

Hiroyuki Imaishi understood what his audience craved from his second best work "Panty and Stocking with Garterbelt" when he parodied it with the mirror work "Sex and Violence with Machspeed" for Hideaki Anno's Animator Expo.

His entire career thus far has been pursuing this aesthetic to its bitter end. The characters of "Dead Leaves" are fatally obsessed with escaping a prison, while having sex escaping it; "Gurren Lagann" in spite of its heart-tugging is really about humanity's endless need for an antagonist for its eternal masculine itch; "Panty and Stocking with Garterbelt", well, who really needs to say more about its "angels" fighting "ghosts" thereby "protecting" the city; beneath all the emo eyeliner "Kill la Kill" is really about shoving a sword or a ship dick to the baddie's sneering face; "Promare" is bad; and the only punk element of "Cyberpunk: Edgerunners" is the cartoonish violence of Black Flag which, I rightly should point out, even Henry Rollins, that ever so insecure macho who joined the band after dropping out of college, had grown out of the time he was, I don't know, 25, when the band broke up on Greg's whim; and Imaishi is 50.

Yet this is not to say he understood it well. And this half-baked semi-understanding has not only devolved his artistic skill, it has allowed others to transform him into what he once villainized: that of a contagion of conformity, a formalist in a suit except in his case, no suit and but a T-shirt, which all the more deceives him.

All to say "Edgerunners" has really run me off the edge of my sanity, or my cynicism; I am literally out of leeway to give him. Yes, it's flashy, petulant, precocious and moronic, all that good stuff; yet it's also massively ignorant and hypocritical where it's a little unconscionable for the audience to not notice how beneath the frenetic animation are the strings of a selfish puppeteer tugging people along to the bank.

### Space Patrol Luluco

The upsetting thing is that, of the works Imaishi ought to take inspiration and evolve from, he should have developed the ideas of his best work, "Space Patrol Luluco". There is no sex and hardly any of the symbols of violence. It's his cleanest work. When it was released in 2016, I was shocked and amazed at how close he came to genuine greatness.

On the surface level, "Luluco" is about a girl who, upon bizarre circumstances, becomes a space patrol officer, embroiled in an even more bizarre adventure. Upon breaking the surface, however, it is a condemnation and a reinvigoration of Imaishi's whole shtick.

The condemnation is clear in episode 7, when the enemy of string is set on fire, screaming as he is dying with giant text superimposed over him stealing his quotations. (This is a blatant "Kill la Kill" reference, especially since we see a "human" Guts, a character hithertofore never seen in the show, try to escape then poignantly die, _two seconds after his introduction_.)

The shocking quantity of the show is its theme on love, which Imaishi, in his other shows, seems to be desperately afraid of, given how tepid and cookie-cutter all of his heroines are - and those who are not, have no romantic relationships at all i.e. Ryuko. More than that, he focused on a thirteen year old girl, someone who is literally new to the vicissitudes of love.

But rather than make it _stupid_ and precious, as so many other shows do, as so many other writers his age have, he took an extremely honest approach with it: he made Luluco just as naive and dumb as someone her age would be. And, to Imaishi, there is nothing wrong with that.

Nova, Luluco's affection, is bland, humorless, and essentially mute, yet pretty. It is most certainly the case she is interested in him for looks alone, or, more importantly, the presence he gives off - his silence is seen as mystery, his nonchalance is seen as calmness, so she can attribute all kinds of behavior on his image. Unbeknownst to her, she is a little like Nova herself - undecided, unmolded, unrealized, unimportant. Her "rival" in "love", Midori, voiced by Imaishi staple Mayumi Shintani, is the opposite; she adds a confident flare to the comedy, and it is indeed the case that episode 3 is when the show picks up.

From here, Imaishi branches off slightly from the comedy of errors to his typical critique, of cynicism and of society, partially when Midori sells an illegal Blackhole app that assists in stealing, specifically when Luluco's mother, queen of the pirates apparently, steals Luluco's entire hometown and puts it up for auction online. As the Space Patrol browse a literal marketplace in an attempt to retake it, they banter about how "this Ogikubo" has 3.5 stars, or "that Ogikubo" looks fake.

Obviously, the Space Patrol are incompetent. Just as his underaged ward is about to die stranded on a meteor, the General Manager over Justice advises her to transform into a gun and fire herself into space, at which point the trajectory of justice "or something" will surely take over and guide her back to Earth, somehow. Imaishi's famous disdain for structure and order is in humorful display here.

In spite of her life unspooling before her - father frozen (and decapitated), hometown stolen - she pines over Nova, wonders what he is thinking, tries to bring up small talk (a truck accident for subject, of all things) and holds hands with him. In her moment of despair, she asks a sex doll for advice - which advice, to pursue love with courage, seems to do well for her.

...only for Imaishi to pull the proverbial rug under you by showing how this was an elaborate scam - the entire story, the dad, the lover, the hometown et cetera - all in order for a Blackholeian, a being who has no emotions, to steal the innocence of a vain, stupid girl's heart, in order to finish their collection of useless trinkets in the universe. The boy Nova was nothing more than a pawn. But the best thing about the Blackholeian is that he is secretly the audience stand-in: someone who looks on the contrived events of Luluco's love story, only to literally manifest within the story and blast her naivete with a stinging critique, which really makes you look like an asshole. Luluco, who is merely a character, does not care for this bit of self-introspection; she is crushed by the unrequital of her love. She is a person through and through; no amount of thinking or snark will stop her from being a flawed person. Having succeeded in taking a little girl's first, vain crush, the Blackholeian in a moment of triumph smashes it into pieces - _having_ it was only important to him, so upon having it, even if briefly, it was now useless to him. A thief through and through.

Her heart stolen from her, our hero goes to Hell. Cold and alone, and inspecting the hole that was once her heart, she traverses Hell, eventually meeting a skeleton. But this skeleton himself was once a Space Patrol officer, and they chat about recent events. The skeleton, who looks quite a bit like our bumbling General Manager over Justice, is wise, and he says, surprisingly, this memorable quote: "Police never operate on a moral compass. They just use the ones as people." That is to say, we're sometimes wrong, but our hearts are right. You're not wrong, and further, he, Nova, is not wrong; even his careful disguise could not perfectly fake affection for you. Go to him!

Episodes 12 and 13 are forgettable except for really interesting imagery of Luluco on a crystal swam boat.

I'm admittedly a bit of a sucker for "Princess Tutu"-like heart-string pulling, but I'm also a cynic at heart. I love watching the heroine win, but even I believe reality is suspended for this tiny universe. Imaishi (at least, I used to believe) feels the same. His sarcasm extends to everything, even his own original works for Studio Trigger. His sarcasm struck everything except for Luluco's love. This was an extraordinary development for a director whose main thematic material revolved around the liberation of the individual; rather than win it through violence, Luluco wins by being honest. (Well, she also wins through violence, but that's secondary.) Once upon a time, we can say, there was a psychological interest, quite intense, in an Imaishi opus. He was indeed moving onto greener pastures.

### Co-founder of Studio Trigger

The last six years have not been kind to Imaishi and Studio Trigger.

This is largely baseless speculation. I sense Studio Trigger isn't doing well. Yes, you can point to their Patreon, but I have noted several anomalies over the past few years:

1. The studio joined parent company Ultra Super Pictures in 2018. This would result in a shorter leash.

2. They haven't been producing much work. Most studios produce more than one title a year. Granted, 2019's "Promare" and 2020's "BNA: Brand New Animal" are original titles.

3. Speaking of "Promare", that movie was almost all 3DCG, done by sibling studio Sanzigen. A very odd choice for a company who is known for traditional animation (unless they couldn't find proper funding for the project, cough cough). "Promare" made 17 million dollars worldwide, which seems pretty good - except when you realize the budget for "Spirited Away", a 2001 film, was 19.2 million dollars. However, this analysis is likely faulty, as "Your Name", a 2016 film, evidently had a budget of 750 million yen, being roughly 5 million dollars. I'm a little suspicious by the extreme disparity of the budgets of "Spirited Away" and "Your Name", but I will allow the audience to make of that data what they will.

4. None of their follow-up work are original titles: the second season of "Panty and Stocking with Garterbelt", "Gridman Universe", and "Delicious in Dungeon", which, picking that title up, may actually be the smartest decision Trigger has made. I think adapting material is occasionally a more creative task than creating new material. However, "Delicious in Dungeon", though seemingly popular - the mangaka of "Chainsawman" likes it quite a lot - belongs on a rather small magazine, Harta, published by Enterbrain. Never heard of them? Maybe they're more popular in Japan. In any case, a great many series published on Harta seemingly don't have an anime attached to them - except for "Haven't You Heard? I'm Sakamoto" - so it makes one naturally suspicious how much Trigger stands to make from this project.

5. A relatively minor detail, but the credits for "Edgerunners" have all the usual suspects: Imaishi, Yoh Yoshinari, Sushio, Masahiko Otsuka. A studio that doesn't acquire more talent is suspicious indeed.

6. Another small detail. Going by Wikipedia, the studio raises 5000 dollars a month via Patreon. Seems impressive, but 5000 dollars multipled by twelve months in a year is 60000 dollars, which is a lot to a good number of folks, but is barely the base salary for a computer engineer in North America.

So let's set aside Trigger for now and focus on the artist, Imaishi.

Since "Luluco", he has directed "Promare" and "Star Wars: Visions". "Promare" seemed to make its money back, but it's a mess of color thrown onto angular 3DCG models that move like a child's cardboard robot. It's bad, and, worse, it's sometimes flat for purportedly being 3D, notable in that scene when Leo _for some reason_ turns into a dragon. The "Twins" short for "Star Wars: Visions" is extremely forgettable; the twins hit each other and things and shoot laser beams at each other. I once noted that "Star Wars: Visions" is a big middle finger to "Star Wars" fans who are craving some creative expansion of the material, and got none, except somewhat in Kenji Kamiyama's work, "The Ninth Jedi", whose writerly quality is expected from the writer of "Ghost in the Shell: Stand Alone Complex".

The contrast is startling and depressing. The same man who made exciting action scenes with Panty and Stocking and Ryuko Matoi, sometimes involving swords, sometimes motor vehicles, sometimes volleyball and tennis, is reduced to a caricature, of giant robots swinging swords or blonde teenagers swinging swords. For all the money that Disney is marbled out of, "Twins" looked cheap and indistinct.

Yet I forgave him. I believe to this day there were budget issues. I can't really see the guy who directed "Panty and Stocking with Garterbelt" as being a savvy financial officer. "Promare" and "Twins" were aimed at the cheap seats, to rake in some cash. That's fine. We live in reality.

This analysis is further muddled in his having a hand in the best episodes of "Little Witch Academia" - "Sleeping Sucy", "Sky War Stanship" - and "BNA" - "Greedy Bears". In "Sleeping Sucy", there is an adventure - and a wonderful "Akira" reference. In "Sky War Stanship", there is a goal. In "Greedy Bears", there is genuine immorality, therefore humor. He either has some excellent grasp of what makes an episode of a series work, being some form of conflict and escalation and earnestness, or he has one hell of a Tinker Bell who can only sprinkle magic fairy dust on episodes every once in a while.

### Running down a thin plot

But I take all that back. "Cyberpunk: Edgerunners" has pushed me off that edge. Imaishi has either stopped caring about the art form or his financial situation has been so compromised that he cannot make any substantial creative directions in his projects, except in art style, as he is stereotyped for. Which is not surprising and seems to happen quite a lot in anime, given what the "Evangelion" series has done for the careers of Hideaki Anno and Kazuya Tsurumaki, who are unable to get rid of that moneymaking albatross from their necks.

I suppose, because it is distributed on Netflix, "Cyberpunk: Edgerunners" is by far Imaishi's most violent and sexually-explicit material. Where once he had opted for a cartoonish depiction of violence and sex, here he supposes himself to be serious, seriously taking charge of issues such as poverty, gang violence and nihilism. "Here is our Artful Dodger, a victim of society," Imaishi declares, while gleefully depicting the bloody dissection of his spine, replacing it for a cybernetic one, our hero's brutal pummeling of a bully, a man, who rightfully was trying to retrieve his friend's goods, exploding into a literal bath of blood, and the skull of our hero's "friend" bursting into green bits of flesh and skull. He is trying to endear you to these characters, while also exaggerating their sordid conditions in a manner that even Quentin Tarantino would find distasteful. And they've all the mindset of puppies, real animals that are unable to control their thoughts or desires, unlike the polished-outside-brutal-inside dynamic of that American filmmaker's characters.

David wants to be free. He plays videogames where he shoots and decapitates cops. His mother nags at him to excel in school. He and his mother are poor. He is bullied for being poor. His mother dies in a tragic accident. David's bully says his mother deserves to die. David then replaces his spine with a cybernetic military grade spine to beat his bully into a living pulp, and then quits school. He is then seduced into becoming a thief, and then into joining a gang. Being in a gang makes a lot of money. Being in a gang is a lot of hard work. People die in a gang. People die going crazy being robots. David loves the gang so he becomes the gang leader. His girlfriend gets captured - it's time to suit up in a giant mecha that drives him insane causing him to die at the end.

Did I lose you anywhere? I may be lost myself. Lost as to what is even our interest in the story.

Are we meant to empathize with David because he's, well, poor? Because he has no direction in life? Because the world around him is awful? Isn't that a horribly passive way to look at things?

David doesn't have to be a passive participant in the world. He can have a job. He can leave the city. He can simply not go to that school. In truth, he has no choice. The characteristic of his character is that he has no choice. What a lovely person to pop out of the screen.

Poverty does not a sympathetic character make; ask Charles Dickens. It's a little fucked-up to make your hero's relatability to the audience be his poverty and social status, especially when a good deal of your audience will be in a cushy room watching the show on their desktop, able to afford a subscription to Netflix. You are genuinely manipulating your audience's empathy towards those more unfortunate for, well, cash. _Especially_ when that same character is then lionized for buying expensive technology to destroy living flesh-and-blood people beyond recognition.

I can't help but wonder if the plot is meant only to be a frame for action scenes to be rendered - which, I should point out, are wonderful. The action is extremely well-choreographed and exciting. This is no "Promare". Here we have Imaishi's eye for color, fluidity and dramatic motion. Though the how and why of every action scene has baffled me: for example, in episode 2, Lucy jumps out of an ambulance _for some reason_ (it is established that she can indeed defend herself). In episode 3, two men on motorcycles plot to crash into the car David has stolen _for some reason_, as that is not a very effective ploy. Somehow, David manages to jump the car onto the opposing lane of traffic. Our villainous pair of faceless bad men, instead of waiting for backup, decide to chase after him, leading one to be gruesomely bisected in half by a truck, the other to be blown up by a cannonball, _for some reason_. So, yes, there is a joy in watching Imaishi's skill and obsession, but there must also be an intellectual impetus to action.

But I digress: I can't help but wonder if the plot is meant only to be a frame for action scenes to be rendered, yet if that were the case, couldn't have there been a simpler vehicle? Have a MacGuffin and let the protagonists chase after the MacGuffin. Problem solved.

One then can only surmise that the project suffers from multiple hands vying for creative control: Bartosz Sztybor, Jan Bartkowicz, and Łukasz Ludkowski wrote the story; Rafał Jaki created the characters; Masahiko Otsuka (a co-founder of Trigger) and Yoshiki Usa wrote the screenplay, which I believe means they adapted the original story into actual lines; and somewhere in the mix of this, Imaishi is presumably trying to get a handle on everything. I would not be surprised if the Polish creative team had a unique hand in making this story particularly appealing to Western audiences, with the Japanese team responsible largely with translating the story into anime-isms, possibly scratching their heads at the larger social implications of the original story and leaving crucial bits of detail on the chopping floor. (And before anyone brings it up: You think there _wouldn't_ be a huge language barrier between these two groups?)

One voice curiously left out is that of Mike Pondsmith, the original creator of the table-top "Cyberpunk" that the video game and the anime are inspired from. An American, Pondsmith created a setting where his country experienced severe decay and eventually became a satellite state for foreign nations. Technology has thoroughly poisoned any flourishing of a happy life, through pollution, famine, and drug abuse. I appreciate the creative team not introducing these ideas into what is supposed to be a character story, but conscious avoidance is not the same as absence. The ultimate story is entirely absent of an environment, except in aesthetic alone, so that we are left with the dog-and-pony show of "good guy fights very mean, very bad guy."

So if you could whittle down "Edgerunners" to two major themes, they are essentially: technology = violence, and cyberpsychosis, a fictitious condition where acquiring more cybernetic parts makes a man turn slowly insane. Which is sufficient cause for one to question, why even graft cybernetic parts to one's body? I already know the answer: this is more Imaishi nihilism. There is no reason why. Human beings have an extreme survival instinct - that is precisely why we are nihilistic - so they would find ways to use weapons that would not deterioriate their health, bodily or mental, in the short or long term, and I should emphasize cyberpsychosis occurs in the short term (within a _year_ of our hero's introduction).

Nevermind that now and focus on the condition itself, which is a permanent psychotic episode that does not lapse and has no clear preceding signs ultimately resulting in death. It's literally on or off, no-inbetween, and when it's on it's on for good, unlike most mental disorders which either have a gradual onset or discernible warning signs. And why does it happen? Does it happen because people are removing specific regions of their brain? Does it happen because of the inextricable link between violence and grafting? No, it simply happens. And what happens when you contract it? Well, you relive some past memories and want to shoot everyone to death. While the animated sequences of characters recalling an amalgam of memories, not sure what is real and what is not, are interesting they don't allow us any real empathy for the suffering character a la The Caretaker's "<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everywhere_at_the_End_of_Time" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Everywhere at the End of Time</a>". Yes, you feel bad for the character, but you don't _empathize_, you don't begin to understand. This, to me, is like watching a freak show, enjoying the freaks contorting and saying, "Wow, it must suck to be them." This is a typical pattern within Imaishi's works: suffering is meant to be ogled at, rather than supported or even shared.

### On Punk

Equally as misguided as the plot is the use of the word "punk" in the title.

A punk is essentially someone on the lowest rung of society. A prison punk is literally on the bottom of a prison hierarchy and is considered someone's property.

Punks are not gangsters.

Our "heroes" are essentially gangsters. "Edgerunners", or rather Trigger's whole shtick, is based off of _wuxia_, literally meaning "martial heroes" in Chinese. The concept is closer to "Scarface" or "Goodfellas" - however, wealth is a critical part of those stories. You can't have your cake of downtrodden, downbeat societal losers and eat it with a jug of guns-blazing action too. No one would choose a career of life-and-death unless they made a substantial amount of money for it.

The reality is, Trigger and CD Projekt co-opted the word "punk" for aesthetic alone. They co-opted many things to impress upon their audience a world, a veritable playground where all their hedonistic dreams come true. And let's say this truth more true and hidden than many else in the world: rich kids love to play poor. Oh yessirree. All this is is an artist indulging their middle-to-upper class consumers to what the world of the riffraff looks like.

### Hiroyuki Imaishi is the establishment

Thus, based on the aesthetics and the development of the opus alone, I come to my conclusion: Hiroyuki Imaishi is the establishment. He has become the Mayor of Daten City, the head of REVOCS Corporation, and the Blackholeian. He has become the monster he despises. And the saddest part is: he is just middle-management. He isn't even on the top rung. He is a pawn of something bigger than him, whom he holds his hand out for cash. He is merely the creative director for someone else's project - he decides aesthetic and how to position images and characters so as to benefit marketers. He has a great deal of technical knowledge on animation, which we absolutely should respect him for, but he has almost no ability for negotiating on his creative freedoms.

Because talent ought know when to play and not to play. Hiroaki Sakurai of "Cromartie High School" fame, who may not have worked on big-name titles recently, has consistently been interesting on all of his projects, even if they are based on Sanrio franchises.

It's been a rocky year for <a href="/dr-stone-ending" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">some</a> established <a href="/one-piece-wano" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">artists</a> and hardly a season has passed since I had to kill <a href="/one-punch-man-manga" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">one idol</a>. But when I analyze ONE's actions, I always found a decent excuse based on his situation. In the worst-case scenario he tried something different, and didn't understand why it didn't work. Unless CD Projekt held a gun to Trigger's head barking, "I want blood, I want cops to get shot, I want TITTIES", knowing they were providing a much-needed cash injection for a modest studio, Imaishi has no excuse. The irony is that Trigger has become the company Imaishi earned his name in and ultimately left: Gainax, which has ceased to make anime, had recently owed money to alum Hideaki Anno, and invests largely in pachinko machines. (Anno's success nowadays is attributed to his work in live-action films; anime is a zero-sum game.)

And as I write this I wonder what is even the point of beating this horse, and whether I should allow the stakeholders to dance hand in hand all the way to the bank. I don't get upset by diamond commercials, "The Jersey Shore", and weapons manufacturing. Upon recalling this passivity would have been the opposite of what early-2010s Imaishi would have wanted, when he founded his studio to create works that uplift people, then I get angry and return to ripping "Edgerunners" apart. He would not have wanted to become another Spiral King, and on the event that he did he would have wanted a Simon to take him down. So, reluctantly, here I am.

When you have just plain ignorance and stubbornness, you only lose. This is the lesson for the anarchists: you can hate the rules, and you can even try to break the rules, but you have to learn the rules first.
