---
title: 'In The Mood For Love'
slug: 'in-the-mood-for-love'
createdAt: '2023-07-13T03:23:42+0000'
seoTitle: 'In The Mood For Love (2000)'
seoDescription: 'We discuss Wong Kar-Wai''s "In The Mood For Love".'
tags: ['film']
---

It's rare when a movie has me actively disliking it while watching it, liking it when it ends, and loving it as I think more and more on it with distance. Yet this precarious affection may fall apart upon second viewing.

Allow me to use the worst words for the film, to exorcise any reservations for it. The drama is laughable. The dialogue, beside that between our leads, is stale and routine. Most of the cast is easily forgotten, and our leads themselves are dull, uninteresting people. The cutting is irritating and more confusing than it needs to be. Breaking up the plot into..._hardly_ vignettes makes the film a tedious slog, with the considerable knowledge that, after all, there are no revelations in the film. And as far as a depiction of love goes, well, the film lacks any psychological depth or literary details - there is a laughable scene where Tony Leung tries to talk about marriage and being single.

Yet I remember the way light falls on Maggie Cheung's face in the noodle restaurant. I remember her coyly asking Tony what his wife eats. I remember that uncomfortably long, and hilarious, scene at the restaurant where they awkwardly cut steak. I remember their lounging in Tony's room all day, eating sticky rice, waiting for the landlady's mahjong party to leave. I remember their resting their heads on opposite sides of a wall, pretending they can look at the other, while "Happy Birthday" is played in the background. I remember Tony's look towards the window, leaving a joke of his coworker's, his smile turned into a deep frown. I remember the wind blowing into those incredibly red curtains at the hotel. I remember Maggie's single tear, almost hidden by the light and the darkness, falling onto her lips, as if she herself didn't see it. I remember her sadly smelling his box of cigarettes, for his scent, and bringing herself to smoke one. And, of course, the ending. The film leaves behind a fine perfume whose pleasure is stronger the more one remembers it.

A film is a film. I forgot that all a film is sound and vision, and not the Aristotelian unities. The plot is a distraction from the internal processes within these characters - and, in a possibly Daoist way, the external matching the internal by way of the intensity of the passion.

And God almighty is Maggie Cheung a good actress. I don't know if anyone else could make the movie work. We all know women in film suffer the male gaze. It's true Maggie looks the part of the feminine mystique, but her hesitations and hot-cold behavior, which conceals doubt and an existential nervousness, reveal an intense humanity. Tony is meant to be the men in the audience, nearly a simpleminded dog, but Maggie seems to be the only fleshed-out character in the film.

I think the ending saved the whole film for me as it made me realize, perhaps, the director did not intend for a straightforward romance in Shanghai and was smarter than he actually let the audience on to be. Tony is seen whispering into a hole in a temple, while a monk quietly watches on. He then leaves, his footsteps echoing forever through this structure meant to symbolize eternity. He has just left behind the secrets of his heart, presumably of his love for Maggie, within this temple, burying it forever in the annals of time. He has acknowledged its death; and in doing so, reminds the audience of its life. The _cheongsam_ worn, the celadon plates, the cheap wallpaper and purses bought from Japan, while chintzy and lacking substance, were once indicators of life, of Maggie and Tony's salad days. I think, as outright depressing as the idea is, connecting their relationship to the eternal worked well for snobs like me, as I was never sure if we were meant to take the pair's drama seriously.

The famous adage goes, "Tragedy plus time equals comedy." Well, not necessarily a comedy here. The troubles surrounding Maggie and Tony, and between them, are so common as to be almost unworthy of film. As the audience, as sympathizers, we get caught up in their troubles, as much as that annoys us as we would be listening to someone else's love life. But the passage of time leaves behind memories and sadnesses, without bitterness; we are left only with light and music, removed from how we feel at the moment. That's precisely what the movie is: not a story, which we play with over and over again, filling out the characters' shoes, but a series of memories we move through with mixed emotions. In that sense, it's a beautiful addition to Chinese artistic canon. I did think to myself, as I disliked the movie while watching it, I may grow fonder of it as I grew older. Well, I am but a day older, and I already long to feel the film's unique texture once more.

---

Possibly the most immense reason why I disliked the film was that I realized how many elements go into contemporary Asian melodramas, which dwell on specific details lavished on a character and a situation and replace substance with these details. This is felt, on first viewing, from the memorable score, the cinematography and the surrounding cast, especially the landlady and Tony's, err, acquaintance. But of course these melodramas do not have Wong Kar-wai's vision, which not so much brings these elements into synthesis as incorporates them into a flow. Not that Kar-wai is the sole person at fault here... Asian story-telling is so full of melodrama, including influence Haruki Murakami. Still, he has probably popularized this concept of a movie going on for fucking forever with nothing doing. As with other piss-poor imitators, which there have been innumerable in the past decade, at least we can say, "Well, the original is good."
