---
title: "Action Swingers' Miserable Life / IVY's Head Business"
slug: 'action-swingers-miserable-life-ivy-head-business'
createdAt: '2024-08-01T22:36:12+0000'
seoTitle: "Action Swingers' Miserable Life / IVY's Head Business"
seoDescription: "For 2024, I'll talk about a song a day: this week is a double feature, Action Swingers' Miserable Life and IVY's Head Business."
tags: ['music']
---

I've given myself the task of writing about one song a week for 2024 because, well, I think it'd be fun.

### Action Swingers' Miserable Life / IVY's Head Business

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lgF_ZTmdqa0?si=rTlapJkX9neHgSvl" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px; margin-top: 1em; max-width: 800px" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=855326423/size=large/bgcol=ffffff/linkcol=0687f5/tracklist=false/artwork=small/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://katorgaworks.bandcamp.com/album/a-cats-cause-no-dogs-problem-7">A Cat&#39;s Cause, No Dogs Problem 7&quot; by Ivy</a></iframe>

I miss the days when Pitchfork used to run weird little features. In its early days, the publication could be self-absorbed and puerile. But... if there's anything to be snotty and annoying about, music is probably one of them. It's definitely the safest thing to get mad about, since it hurts absolutely no one. And being kind of a prick about music, reveals how people think about music. Dominique Leone introduced me to stranger paths in electronic music and Evan Minsker, who wrote about today's band, Action Swingers, had a fun, casual column - for, like, five weeks - on garage rock. Good times. Things definitely got worse after it was acquired by Condé Nast, and, hand on my heart, I didn't know it was being merged into GQ until I had the idea to randomly write about these songs. I'm not sure what the publication's fate is, but, whatever biases I perceived in its editorial board and however much I skim through the writing now, I find it still recommends interesting music, somewhat off the beaten path, and I find a lot of love in the Sunday classics review.

Well, it looks like we're talking about this now... it's always nice to find people who _love_ music, more than anything else. That is to say, I hate lifestyles. Primarily because, liberal that I am, everyone leads a different life, therefore they should adopt the style that fits their life. We should be interested in _things_, and not their meaning, for Protagoras had said, "Man is the measure of all things, alike of the being of the things that are and the non-being of the things that are not." That is, meaning flows through us and is molded by us. I try to mold music into meaning, because it has no inherent value on its own; on its own, it is wind and nothing more. I have no intent to _assign_ meaning to things, as if meaning is a column to the temple of its greatness. I know all too well how these these kinds of decoration fade. This is the main activity of a lifestyle publication, and unfortunately there are too many of these. Worst of all is that many publications disguise themselves. Music becomes a lifestyle requiring certain rituals and garbs, and certain literature to peruse to be in the know. Fuck that. When I think of music, I think of Michael Azerrad's description of a Black Flag basement concert: bloody, brief, brutal. But transcendental. Because even skinheads need transcendence. Roll out the six pack; if you're not having any, Mudhoney will drink it all. This was Pitchfork once: it didn't matter who wrote the music, who was making it or who was listening to it. It's just about the music. And I honestly don't have an adequate substitute for a general music publication.

In any case, Evan Minsker used to run a column for garage music - I'm not sure if it's archived online, and I'm too lazy to find it - that I would peruse because his picks were generally interesting. I would love to talk about Peach Kelli Pop, whom he highlighted in a column. I really fucking do. But it happened, this year, I remembered this incredibly small album, compiled in 1994 from cuts in the late 1980s, of such unfathomable misanthropy, and picked it up again. And found it was still really good.

The band is the Action Swingers and the compilation is "Quit While You're Ahead" which, going by the band's contemporary status, is a more than adequate title. And while we're covering obscure New York garage music, might as well add in IVY's 7-inch "A Cat's Cause, No Dogs Problem".

There's something to murk that makes it appealing. The cleanliness of radio-ready music is intentional: the polish lets you know that the music is meant to be listened to, and if it is meant to be listened to it is meant to be enjoyed. Static and other kinds of audio artifacts don't convey rebelliousness; they don't convey earnestness; but they certainly don't convey intention - because if you could clean up the music, why wouldn't you? - and that's enough for a certain type of person i.e. me. There's also the plain enjoyment of noise and the patterns in it that we think we discern and the patterns that we don't. (As an aside, I'm an on-off fan of analog/internet horror and murk in audio recording is part of the pleasure. Beyond the ephemeral feeling that the recording is "real", imagining voices and awaiting changes in the chaos contributes a lot to the anticipation.)

The late, great Steve Albini (whose birthday I realize now I missed) [had said](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Albini#Influences) "anybody can play notes. There's no trick. What is a trick and a good one is to make a guitar do things that don't sound like a guitar at all. The point here is stretching the boundaries." That's art: unusualness is the key. What's striking about the albums that came out of Albini's studio is the presence of air, that shakes when a guitar's string shakes, that erupts when a drum is pounded. Usually air is removed from a single, because artists don't want you to think their heavenly song was recorded on this mortal plane. But music, by nature, is the instruments' interaction with their environment.

This is all true and also not true of the Action Swingers' "Quit While You're Ahead". You can hear the phlegm in frontman Ned Hayden's voice, but the recording is so crappy there's a layer of crackle between the actual performance and what was recorded. But that's interesting in of itself, because we can imagine and not imagine what the songs would have sounded like without the tape hiss. The crackle is part of the song, melting the guitar solos, dulling the singer's yelps and muddying the cymbals. We see a band rocking and rolling in sludge. That's part of the art. It's literal sound and fury decaying into death.

Indeed, it's critical to punk rock's theme of the decaying of morals, almost to an absurdist degree. We are watching the human brain devolving in real time into its animalistic forebear's. The bands of the '70s relied on cartoon imagery to achieve this, but from the '80s onward there was just a pure, Pavlovian addiction to noise that conveyed the brutishness of nature. When we contemplate on AC/DC and Kiss, they want to elevate brutality into triumph, becoming Roman conquerors where might makes right; the punk rockers possessed a kind of purity where they felt brutality and the society that sustained it should just die.

So goes "Miserable Life", which very simply starts: "You've got a miserable house, / you've got a miserable job, / you've got a miserable life, / you miserable slob." Hayden scoffs, as the band goes on roaring. "You've got a miserable check, / and a miserable car, / you spend your miserable life / at a miserable bar." Hitting too close to home? As "normal" as your life is, don't you ever feel this same static of boredom play in your head in the irregular hours?

Then Hayden screams: "I hope you're happy, / with your stinking miserable life, / I hope you're having a good time now, / with your stiiiiinking miserable life!" He then "collapses" into a coughing frenzy, as if consuming the fumes of the rampaging car the band is depicting, which may be driving off the edge of the cliff. (The band changed guitarists frequently, so I'm curious who plays the guitars here, Ned or Julia Cafritz. It could also be someone else they brought specifically in for the recording, who knows.)

It's a rather miserable ending for those not familiar with punk, but the fantasy is not a reality. Sure, the music devolves into noise, as possibly compared to the breaking down of a human body, but it's alright if the singer dies rather than audience. It's a fictional character, after all. The minor hope is that it makes us contemplate on our miserable lives, even if it makes us feel more miserable about our miserable lives. At least there's _some_ progress.

If "Miserable Life" is murky, good lord is IVY's "Head Business" _murkier_. You can barely make out the singer's vocals. The only words I can distinguish in the second verse are sneered, "human being". Meanwhile, the Motörhead riff intensifies, but the guitar is so fuzzed it sounds like molten magma. The guitar and the drums play a game as to who can be louder. The lyrics in the second half of the song are much more distinguishable: "don't wanna hear nothing, / don't wanna see nothing", only to devolve into a primal scream. The band escalates and escalates until they relent at the end; the song then fades out at the clichéd fade into static. I'm ok with this cliché. The second half of "Dow Jones' Business" is even more pummeling and primitive. I recall [John Cage's eternal question on Glenn Branca's art](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UzfG9V_hDps&pp=ygUWam9obiBjYWdlIGdsZW5uIGJyYW5jYQ%3D%3D): would you want to live in a society implied by the music? The punk rockers have the answer: we have always lived in it, and we're recreating it in miniature in our garage. All hail noise.
