---
title: 'Oshi no Ko'
slug: 'oshi-no-ko'
createdAt: '2023-07-13T03:23:42+0000'
seoTitle: 'Oshi no Ko'
seoDescription: "It's the Oshi no Ko show, where we see an author's creepy obsession with actors/actresses."
tags: ['animation, anime']
---

Beyond a pretty good first episode and a very well-executed opening, there's not much to idolize for "Oshi no Ko". Concerning its popularity - the series riding off of the coat-tails of Aka Akasaka's previous project, "Love is War" (nevermind the Romanji for this one) - there's also not much to say; it's equal parts baffling and wasted potential, which is expected from anime. But I find something unsettling lurking beneath it.

The show, to me, is really just the first episode. We're introduced to an eccentric gynecologist and his patient, an underaged, pregnant idol. Both are likeable, because they're given ample amounts of characterization. Oh, and the doctor knows a little girl with cancer. You cannot dislike these people. Then there's the whole twist where everyone dies and the doctor is reborn as the idol's son. So you see where the virality comes from: good writing here, straight-up strangeness in the plotting there. By the time the second episode comes in, we feel we know what the show is, through the opening: it's about the madness of celebrity and the crowds who attend upon them. Except...not. The first half of the series establishes characters, abandons them, and the murder plot gets lost in some odd dating game, which may, as a Westerner, have totally lost me.

But that's what's unsettling about "Oshi no Ko" - once we are through with the masquerade and see what the true substance of the show is, there being no plot and all, we find that it's really just about celebrity. Which is creepy. Because there are people involved, and obscured. It's all well and good if these were incorporated thematically into a coherent story, as in the story of our reincarnated Aqua going through the seedy entertainment industry to find his mother's murderer, but when isolated it looks like a writer's odd obsession with TV and film.

This is where we turn our attention to how the sausage is made; or to phrase in another way, I don't understand Japanese writing all that much. Not _all_ writing, from an island that writes startlingly beautiful prose, but particularly the writing of anime, and some films I see. I remarked that writing is rather novelistic - writers take the pains of detailing how a character thinks and how precisely a process operates. This is fine for, say, "Kokoro", which is about the aftermath of a suicide, or, a lesser example, "Oishinbo", which is about the human thought and play that goes into cooking, but this approach is absolutely boring for anything else. I've covered this in "Blue Period" a while back: you have to relate the process to humanity. And it's all the weirder to see this style in a visual medium.

So saying, it's discomforting to see this writing style applied to celebrity, because the people in the industry get lost in the notes. We're not talking about Satoshi Kon's "Millenium Actress" here, where there is an attempt to reveal the human beneath the titular actress; Akasaka's writing is a clinical inspection of the behind-the-scenes of entertainment. That the "Love is War" author is known for writing wooden characters meant for gags, doesn't help. A number of the characters deal with depression and suicidal tendencies, but the show is little about them, and more on how those feelings come from being in the entertainment business. It's not character-centric. You start from those feelings, and then depict how entertainment is an expression of those feelings. Otherwise the characters become what is being satirized: cogs in a machine.

This is all the more odd as the illustrator, Mengo Yokoyari, is known for writing a really lovely psychological work, "Kuzu no Honkai", or "Scum's Wish". The main character of that work has a beautiful monologue on how she's unable to connect emotionally to anyone, even though she still seeks intimacy from people. Again: you begin from the character, not from the scenario. The scenario tests the character. "Scum's Wish" at times is very silly, but my God do the characters stand out in their insecurities and obsessions. (The women, really; the men, admittedly, are like cartoons.) This is glaring because Akasaka focused on the female aspect of the industry, which approach I agree with, particularly with the recent Western MeToo movement, though we can find many analogues to this in Eastern culture. I sometimes wish Yokoyari would offer her two-cents into the writing every now and then, particularly with Kana Arima, who criminally gets little screen-time and is the most nuanced character thus far. Arima is in a bit of a twilight state where she was once famous and suffers severe loneliness. In that character is all of the themes of the show. What wasted potential.

And now we must address the male gaze, or rather, the difficulty posed to men writing women. We tend to lose the female perspective in a situation precisely because we don't go into depth on how the female character thinks and positions herself in a situation. As men, we sometimes think: there is a problem, and we must get through the problem. All well and good when the problem is not psychic in nature. In this I can somewhat commend Akasaka for addressing the hardship actors undergo as they attempt to attain stardom, but I can't give any praise for his approach. In writing about a system that mechanizes people, he himself mechanizes his characters to depict that system, which shows how thoroughly he has bought the studios' narrative.
