---
title: 'Poor Things'
slug: 'poor-things'
createdAt: '2023-12-31T06:36:41+0000'
seoTitle: 'Poor Things'
seoDescription: '"Ah, the poor thing, Poor Things.'
tags: ['film']
---

Let's do a quick one on "Poor Things": I have not read Alasdair Grey's novel. I would love to. Everything about the premise appeals to me, precisely the blur between fantasy and reality, absurdity and tragedy. I love the idea that a man has concocted a whole story from his being a cuckold. The most influential novel of the 20th century will probably be James Joyce's "Ulysses"; we have, unfortunately, many sons of the book that possess Joyce's wounded, pretentious masculinity, without, what I think is, Joyce's genuine naivete and wonder at the world. Writers are far too clever for their own good. That's why I like Gray's (supposed) cleverness against the male voice and himself, giving, at last, the female the last word in their depiction, while having a bit of fun along the way.

Lanthimos' "Poor Things" is that, but only for the first half. I watched the film with my mouth agape, because the premise was so absurd and I had no idea where it was going. I laughed a lot. To spoil: Willem Dafoe has the sincere idea that the most logical thing to do with the corpse of a pregnant woman is, to take the unborn child's brain and put it into the body. Thus creating, somehow, a new human. His reasoning is sincere too: Shall we live in a world without Bella? he says. I sincerely say it's the best reasoning.

But you can't expect the audience to take any of this, well, seriously at all. Yes, yes, metaphor metaphor, analogy analogy analogy. But...no. Bella realizing how much she enjoys masturbating is one of the funniest things I've seen in film in a while, but it works only because it is a wink and a nod to the audience. It's a joke on the audience's extreme feelings on sex, in the same vein [Dave Chapelle's exaggerated horniness is a joke](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CXFF8Hm6XBo). So, too, are the quick cuts to Emma Stone and Mark Ruffalo having sex immediately, spontaneously, unexhausted. It doesn't work when taken seriously.

This is where the conversation becomes interesting: you can't take the literal things on-screen seriously, because they happen to an infant in a grown woman's body, but you can take its themes, on the double standards of sexuality, on male jealousy, on the individual's natural propensity to learn about the world around them, very seriously. Duncan, Ruffalo's character, believes it is entirely natural to assume, his having Bella sexually, she prefers him over her actual fiancée, McCandles. But this is not true at all. This is a far from natural assumption. The correct assumption is Bella's, that she, merely, likes having sex with Duncan, nothing more and nothing less, and that his feelings, which manifest as his supposition of her feelings for him, are illusory. This is very, very, very funny. As absurd and ridiculous the scenarios are, they still provoke thought in the audience, and that thought provoked, though from unreal premises, still lives and thrives, and forces the audience to consider. This is the power of fiction. We should be so happy to use it.

The problem then begins in the midpoint of the film when Bella begins to feel empathy for the people, the "poor things", around her. This is the turning point: up until this point, Bella, our Frankenstein, and our surrogate in the film, coming upon old concepts in a new way, merely looked at humanity as a curiosity, a butterfly meant to be examined behind a glass case, as her creator, Godwin, had. Bella has never shown empathy for other people in the entire film. Not. Once. This is a jarring way to introduce her character growth, such that the film becomes very unrecognizable after this midpoint and finally enters its ultimate arc of trying to make a human out of Bella, when what made her character so interesting was that she was profoundly unhuman. Then the film becomes trapped in a brothel, with the madam lecturing Bella on the complexities of life - a little on the nose, isn't it? - and, when the film _should_ end, it instead drags itself forward on an arc very unneeded for Bella's ultimate realization and control over her life.

There's no easy way to make Bella's character arc natural. There is a possible path with Bella's extreme love for freedom - more than sex, more than alcohol, Bella very much loves doing whatever she wants. If one could somehow connect her individuality to her understanding the need to respect other people's individuality, then you would have the connective tissue. You would also need to trim 30 minutes of film, but that's a different herculean task altogether.

Not to point fingers - and I don't really like to when I quite enjoyed, maybe even loved, the film - but Emma Stone, Bella's actress, is counted among the producers, and I'm not sure if she has a substantial hand in this. Lanthimos, assuredly, is no stranger to cruelty, which this film lacks, to the point where it feels toothless when you ultimately reach the end. The very idea of a female Frankenstein bears the cynicism of a Stepford Wife; this is a great opportunity to have a mean-spirited laugh at your and the audience's expectations (and believe you me, I love being laughed at every once in a while). For example, I entertained briefly the idea that Bella would find being a prostitute a dream occupation. On the flipside, Bella's creator, Godwin, who certainly counts among the false patriarchs that try to rope her along, simply resolves his paternal conflict, upon finding he dearly misses her. As an audience member, I found Dafoe empathetic as Godwin, but, as an artist, I wanted the film to explore his own agony as a lifelong experiment of his own father's, which had never...resolved, for life never resolves. There was a pleasurable full-throated nasty laugh somewhere for Godwin's demise, as a result of his arrogance and his indifference to humanity and its needs. I can, however, believe the fault lies solely with Lanthimos, who may have been a slavishly adoring fan of Gray's, to the point of detriment.

Because a very good to great film is at the tip of my tongue, but its ideation never resolves, and its appearance ever eludes me as I, in my madness, try to piece it together, so too will I not give "Poor Things" a properly concluding review. I love the film, its strangeness and its love for strangeness. I love the film for its sickness. But I do not love its attempting to cure its sickness. I wish it were a stranger and yet stranger film.
