---
title: "Radiohead's Hail to the Thief"
slug: '/radiohead-hail-to-the-thief'
createdAt: '2023-12-31T06:36:41+0000'
seoTitle: "Radiohead's Hail to the Thief"
seoDescription: "We discuss the one Radiohead album I actually love: Hail to the Thief."
tags: ['music']
---

What am I doing here?

I know why: I'm here because I didn't do due diligence when [writing about my favorite album of 2003](/favorite-albums-2000s). It all began with that damn "Alcachofa" which slipped out of my memory. When you fuck up, you have to go back to the audit. You're right to think not just the assessment, but the entire method was wrong. And so I had to go back and listen to a bunch of records that passed my memory.

I mean that question in two ways: in terms of motivation and in terms of angst. As in, what is life? Why am I alive? Was it just for this moment? This schadenfreude of admitting there's one pretty good Radiohead album, and it's "Hail to the Thief"?

The omission was logical. One, I don't really like Radiohead. I _liked_ them once, but that's over, and I still think it is. Two, everyone says this is a valley, not really a low point, in their career. Of the times to listen to music critics, I had to do it for this album.

I think Robert Christgau explained why I like it more succinctly than I ever could: [it flows better](https://www.robertchristgau.com/xg/rock/radiohead-03.php). (I implore you to go read that essay; he's hilarious in it. A highlight, for me, is when he describes himself as having "trained myself to enjoy three or four songs" of "OK Computer".) I'm a sucker for melody, I've realized over time.

Something very important to mention. I am choosing Thom Yorke's [alt tracklist](https://www.reddit.com/r/radiohead/comments/oqyg01/thoms_alt_tracklist_for_hail_to_the_thief/) when reviewing this album. I had already chosen to write about "Hail to the Thief" before I listened to this version.

This is where things get very muddy when it comes to the structure called an "album", we are accustomed to. It's ultimately an arbitrary structure, but, when put under the lens of "expression", what is arbitrary becomes very important. This contradiction is difficult to parse through and, the more we analyze it, the more it threatens to invalidate any thoughts we have concerning a "top 10 albums of the year" or "the new 5 star album" or "best album of the decade". One plausible route is to approach arbitrariness arbitrarily; as in, when it becomes inconvenient or useless for us to analyze, we simply throw it away. On the face that seems to be fair game. The other route is to think very critically at the album structure as compared to the music, in the sense of, Is the music greater than the album such that it merits far more discussion? This is plausible but works only on a case-by-case basis. You can certainly make this argument for Elvis Presley's self-titled, or "Mingus Ah Um". But not "Black Saint and the Sinner Lady". We forget that an album tends to be a convenient unit of sale for an artist, and can therefore be composed merely of the artist's strongest works.

I'm being erudite about the subject upfront because I don't have a good answer to this question. The concept of an album being a definitive statement is something constructed by critics, not necessarily by the artists. Kanye West, who can be called the Artist Incarnate, or the Artist Absurdum, did not think too highly of this when he changed "Life of Pablo" several times, sometimes for the better, sometimes for the worse (I do not like "Saint Pablo" at all). Well, if that's what Kanye wants to do, then it's only the critics' job to record that he does. If art is expression, aren't people allowed to revise what they say as they see fit? What's important is that the original exists, so we can compare and contrast. I suppose I have this perspective because, in literature, this is a non-problem: books are always published in multiple editions, usually correcting typos, sometimes adding things, sometimes changing out-dated things (for non-fiction books, or for sentences that, well, may just seem rude in modern society). Literature has always been the place for the unconventional, and I don't see a reason this can't be extended to music.

I have decided to treat "Hail to the Thief" as a classic rock album: the tracks themselves are meant to be stronger than the album itself. That does seem to be the case as I listen to it. I know Yorke isn't the authoritative voice in the band, but I, correctly, thought I personally would have liked his alteration more.

Thom Yorke, stylistically, is understated. In his projects away from Radiohead, he prefers anticlimatic, even pathetic endings, and isn't all too interested in letting one element of a song stand out from the other. Perhaps there is an interview somewhere explaining why precisely he has adopted his mumble singing. I think I have always respected his approach, but never cared too much for the end result. I get the sense that, with Radiohead, there is only a need to create an interesting project, and he doesn't exercise his..._obsession_ with perfection in the band (which is good for the band's sanity and, honestly, makes the critic's job more interesting).

In so saying, the irony is that Thom Yorke is not a rock musician. At all. That's what the alternative tracklist reveals. That's probably why I like it too.

It's a coincidence that Radiohead was _discovered_ as a rock band. Rock was profitable at the time. I mean, "Nevermind". It's a coincidence that they hit it big. They just stood out. And it's a coincidence they were poised after Blur and Oasis. But they not only cared little for the label, they bore contempt for anyone who thought so. Yet they were persistently called a rock band. That aforementioned Christgau essay says it all: Radiohead was built up too big to _not_ be a rock group.

Christgau also gets at what made Radiohead big: the successful integration of electronica into rock. But the old crank, and I'm turning into an old crank myself, failed to say that the band were successful in putting a voice - a self-deprecating, depressive voice, true, but an egotistic, ambitious, selfish voice, very punk! - to electronic music. Rock is a lot of things. I will always say, musically, it's rhythm. But rock, well, at one point in time, was the one of the legitimate venues for Big Ideas. Seeing Radiohead was not pop - with Yorke's voice? Nah - they fit into the rock pigeonhole.

If I look retroactively and say Radiohead was an experimental band a la Throbbing Gristle or Suicide, that would only be partially correct, but it would also raise interesting questions. Really, the band should be lumped next to Nine Inch Nails over The White Stripes - indeed, because we live in the far, far future, we scratch our heads that Christgau would even put Head and Stripes in the same sentence. Because it's hard to call Radiohead _just_ rock. Much like the lyrics themselves, there does seem to be a schizophrenic back-and-forth leaning on one genre and the other. I would call the band confused. Which is fine. It makes things more interesting. Let's leave it at that.

For those apprehensive of Yorke's tracklist i.e. placing "There, There" at slot one over "2 + 2 = 5", it's worth noting both function similarly: they start out quiet and escalate in the second half, which structure reflects the album's bipolar nature (the same duality as in all of their music). "There, There" is a little awkward in that it, well, just _starts_, which is either our not having a proper mix of "There, There" to open the album or Yorke's penchant for understatement, as in, _Here_ is the record, with wide open arms. Beyond the musical awkwardness, I, _personally_, think "There, There" works better because 1) it's good, 2) it gives the audience what it wants i.e. that aforementioned big sound, and 3) "2 + 2 = 5" is so strong it makes the album lopsided. One of the purposes of album structure is to reveal the album's themes piece by piece. "2 + 2 = 5" gives the impression that the album is a political one, particularly as it came out around the time the Blair administration gave vocal support for the War in Iraq. (With the removal of "I Will" and "A Punchup at a Wedding", it may be the only politically overt, or overt-feeling, song left.) Lyrically - though often with Radiohead songs we say, "Lyrics be damned" - "There, There" is an invitation to Yorke's ongoing horror movie of a life, of being seduced into an out-of-body experience that, despite Radiohead's stadium-ready songs, is not transcendentalism...at all. They stink of death. "We are accidents, waiting to happen," Yorke wails at the end. Well, at least death begins the album; we can only go up from here. Yorke said he was influenced by his then-wife's studies in Dante's "Inferno".

How fitting that it is succeeded by "The Gloaming", which was an alternative title for the album. Originally track 8, at track 2 it follows after the singer's descent in "There, There". Lyrically and musically, it makes me think of someone running through the [Backrooms](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4dGpz6cnHo&pp=ygUXYmFja3Jvb21zIGZvdW5kIGZvb3RhZ2U%3D), or a musical interpretation of, given the relentlessness of the track.

Track 3 is usually the best place to open up an album's themes, which is done superlatively with "Sail to the Moon", my favorite Radiohead song. The drama that I usually disdain in their songs, I love here; that regret Yorke has in his voice as he sings, "I sailed the moon, / I spoke too soon," feels almost, well, operatic. It's the most emotional I've heard him, to tell the truth. Yes, yes, we can make bones with the line "Maybe you'll / be president", but, again, I don't see much political about it. It is the most anxiety-inducing line of the album, simultaneously a warning of his impending ego trip and a vain desire for a kind of Messiah - and before you contest this, know that he once said he was "back to save the universe" in "Airbag". The descent in "There, There" and "The Gloaming" is not only physical; it is also spiritual.

Well, alright, I agree with Christgau here: "Sit Down. Stand Up" is an awkward track. I personally think it's fine. I see the counter-position very well, though.

"Go to Sleep" has another excellent vocal performance from Yorke, where he yodels "Over my dead body". In hindsight, that's what makes "Hail to the Thief" great rock: most of the songs have one Big Idea, one Big Phrase that the crowd can gather around to, regardless of how morbid it is. That "Over my dead body", he sings triumphantly like the mountaineer crying "Ricola!" But what delicious menace: "Something for the rag-and-bone man... / Over my dead body! / Something big is gonna happen... / Over my dead body!" Then Yorke raps (I don't know how else to describe it): "We don't wanna wake the monster, taking over, / tip-toe around, tie him down." Again, look aside from the politics: this struggle is no different from Nietzsche's dragon, that men fear because it sleeps in the abyss of their soul.

Let's set down "Where I End and You Begin" and pick up the excellent "Scatterbrain", beginning with Yorke's "I'm walking out... / in a force-ten gale" where "your voice is rapping on my window-sill." What really sells the song is the snakey guitar, bobbing up and down around Yorke's wail of a voice (and I can't for the life of me find who's playing it, Jonny maybe?). The ending lyrics: "Somewhere I'm not... / scatterbrain!" This formally begins the album's arc in the second half, with "Myxomatosis" and "A Wolf at the Door": the protagonist succumbing finally to illness, weakness, self-defeat, almost as if these are more redemptive than strength is, adding to the album's anti-authoritarian tone.

The fiery "2 + 2 = 5". That spiraling intro, "Are you such a dreamer / to put the world to rights?" returns to that absurdist theme, the lyrics directed simultaneously to Yorke, the audience, and whatever ambiguous entity you want to name, government, military, etc as if these are all one and the same. The line conveys the thoughts, Should I put the world to rights? and How dare you assume you can do so? This is the same Yorke who wondered in "Sail to the Moon" whether he could be president. He enters a true psychedelic frothing rage in the latter half of the track, yelling out the album title, not in triumph, as he succumbs to his own schizophrenic madness, but in a way a small kind of victory on asserting his own individualism.

We end on the fairy tale-like "A Wolf at the Door", whose first half is a laundry list of demands casually made to our protagonist, including "dance, you fucker" and "don't look in the mirror at the face you don't recognize". This is reminiscent of Bertolt Brecht's Mr. Keuner, who tells an anecdote on being coerced to live with Power. The second half returns the "I" - as in, the protagonist is threatened by a wolf at the door to comply. For the grimness of the subject matter, the song itself has a feeling of magic as in the aforementioned "Airbag". The band certainly didn't intend this, but it's almost a wink and a nod that the world being constructed is not real and is a kind of dream. Perhaps this meaning is intended, and it goes two ways: yes, this is a dream, but when it does happen, it'll still feel like a dream too. This may have been Yorke's way of coping with a world he really did not recognize.

There's an argument to be made that the Bush-era albums are too enticing not to study. I thought Fugazi's "Argument" was largely alone in this category until I heard people across the pond were also tackling the subject. I mean, "Strangelight" would fit perfectly for "Hail to the Thief", and "2 + 2 = 5" vice versa. It's interesting how it's a different type of anger than in the past; when I think of Thatcherism I think of Wire and Gang of Four, when I think of Reaganomics I think of The Dead Kennedys and Black Flag, when I think of the Gulf War I think of Nine Inch Nails and Green Day, I guess. The 2000s was rife with a very surrealist, positively un-abrasive version of anger, I suppose coming from the shock of 9/11.

I don't think any year is good for war, but this is a good year to think about war. It was entirely incidental for me to re-discover "Hail to the Thief" in this climate. I'm surprised by how gentle it is. I would imagine most people would approach the subject matter with a [Tim Heidecker-esque "No more bullshit!"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0gnnFVRlucg) approach. Or, well, [like "Rich Men North of Richmond"](/rich-men-north-of-richmond). Instead Yorke seemed to be confounded with the human capacity to lie and kill, which probably informed his approach to the lyrics.

I don't know why it's my favorite Radiohead album thus far, but, having not put too much energy into research, I like to think the millenium kicked the band into proper gear. I still think "OK Computer" is cute. "Kid A" was their first fly-or-die moment, less "what are we trying to say?" and more "what can we get away with?", which approach I respect. "Hail to the Thief" may have been their first "OK, let's actually take this seriously" moment, particularly timed around the birth of Yorke's son and his marriage. And, of course, the ongoing issues with the world and his, likely, dread of, "I just put another human being into this bloody place." Perhaps I'll come to like "In Rainbows" after this - I feel it coming - but here I savor the anger, though I don't wish any of the band members to be angry. I do think anger is an appropriate response to the (ongoing) state of the world. William Gass, my mentor, not the most temperate of people however, who had lived through the '60s, said this: "I must say I trust hatred more than love. It is frequently constructive, despite the propaganda to the contrary; it is less frequently practiced by hypocrites; it is more clearly understood; it is painfully purchased and therefore often earned; and its objects sometimes even deserve their hoped-for fate." And the part I myself parrot: "If you love the good, you have to hate evil. I cannot imagine a love so puerile and thin and weak-kneed it cannot rage." Perhaps that's why I love this album the most. Other albums feel precious, and therefore cheaply-made; this one contains the band's feelings. Its earnestness and lack of trickery are rather punk. Perhaps that's why they should be called the greatest contemporary rock band.
