---
title: "Rewriting One Piece's New World: Dressrosa"
slug: '/one-piece-rewrite-dressrosa'
createdAt: '2023-01-01T05:09:56+0000'
seoTitle: "Rewriting One Piece's New World: Dressrosa"
seoDescription: "We rewrite One Piece's Dressrosa arc."
tags: ['animation', 'anime']
---

Before we start, can we bring back Shirt Doflamingo? I feel like Doflamingo wearing a shirt versus Doflamingo not wearing a shirt is somehow more menacing.

Zoro brings up the fact that they can't trust Law. Law smiles. "Wouldn't want it any other way. Pirates shouldn't trust each other."

Doflamingo conducts a meeting with his clients of the underworld, who demand why they should stay in business with him and not expose his secrets, now that he is no longer a warlord of the sea and SMILE production is halted. Doflamingo sticks out three fingers. One, he still has many connections to weapons dealers and the governments of other countries. Two, he has experience. Who are they going to put their trust in? Some stuck-up geezer who will raise prices on goods with half the quality? Or will they go with someone new? "Bege? Hawkins?" In fact, he could kill all of them now if he wanted to. "Just kidding." "And three?" "Three? Why... I'm an institution!"

I don't think it's a good idea if Doflamingo lies about quitting the warlords of the sea. I understand, as a Celestial Dragon, he is capable of doing so, but his father rejected being a Celestial Dragon a while ago. Unless I am missing a major element of the world, it doesn't seem possible for him to call the shots, though I totally intend to use the "immortality" of the Celestial Dragons as an element in the story. Second, it's disappointing Doflamingo clings so hard to that title. Doflamingo to me is special even among the warlords for his competence, and his crew genuinely believes he can be king of the pirates, unlike the crews of other warlords. Third, it's kinda more fun if Doflamingo actually quits. He seems too cushy with all his privileges, and he doesn't really do much with them. I love the idea that he's more dangerous as a cornered animal, or demon.

On the setting of Dressrosa. Dressrosa is not an island. It is a coastal city on a complex continent, populated by a diversity of people. The continent is dominated by massive cliffs; people do live on the cliffs, but they are constantly in danger of being knocked off them and falling to their death. As a result, the inhabitants have developed powerful fighting style - the Eight-Impact Fist, which produces shockwaves knocking inexperienced challengers into the canyons below, and a martial style revolving around tripping and incapacitating people.

Beneath the canyons are turbulent rapids that will test the mettle of any crew. The island is carved almost entirely of these rivers, cutting it up into nearly-impassable regions. Rapid currents surround the continent, demanding an experienced crew for entering it. Worse, the currents force in sea kings, causing trouble for the continent's inhabitants. A particular pest is the Fighting Fish, strong enough to resist the currents.

The islands in the center were considered uninhabitable until they were united into one kingdom, with its citizens considered some of the best sailors in the whole world. The lands to the south are subjected to frequent floods, causing them to be marshy. Most settlements are built on hills. Because the marshes are difficult to navigate, there is no "formal" kingdom, but it is acknowledged that Elizobello II's rule is the most legitimate, due to his awesome strength.

There are other kingdoms in the continent, but of particular note is a newly founded settlement encroaching from the west. It is known as "New Elbaf", as many giants found the land quite hospitable for their kind: they are not afraid of the rapids or the cliffs, and the land is quite fertile.

The underground is actually a complex hive of tunnels leading to the Tontatta Kingdom, land of the dwarves. They are able to access every part of the continent at once by avoiding the rivers. When they had met Noland, they possessed Green Bit and had established homes there; since then, they have lost Green Bit due to Doflamingo's rulership of Dressrosa. They want to reclaim Green Bit in honor of their friendship with Noland.

Where all other kingdoms encounter problems due to the extreme currents - cold weather, marshes, precipitous cliffs, strong winds - Dressrosa encounters none of their problems and has all of their advantages. The weather is extremely pleasant, the ground is very fertile, and they have access to every other kingdom in the continent due to the currents. The Dressrosa kingdom has been wealthy and powerful for centuries.

The kingdoms regularly fight each other for resources as a result of the difficult living. Often the king of Dressrosa negotiates peace between kingdoms, using Green Bit as the in-between, as it is a relatively peaceful island.

As the Dressrosans are constantly beset by war, the citizens value martial training. Depending on the king, they have educated, organized armies, or they have bloody, brutal armies (guess what Doflamingo has). The colosseum is used to prove the mettle of an individual who has lost all credibility in the community. It is also used to bring together the other kingdoms in a spirit of competition, where the king of Dressrosa offers the most valuable treasure in his possession to the winner, regardless of race and nationality. However, King Riku, the previous king, had considered it barbaric and attempted to close it.

In recent times, Dressrosa, besides its bounty, is now renown as a major pirate port. Children are raised to be aggressive and paranoid, women are raised to lie, steal and swindle. Slavery is encouraged. (I never understood why there were toy slaves when Doflamingo dealt with real slaves.) Those who are competent become members of the Donquixote Pirates where they are treated as a part of Doflamingo's "family". (Dressrosa is essentially King Cobra's nightmare; it is the symbol of the ruthlessness of the New World.)

His resignation has been timely. He is using this moment to send the assassins of the family (Pica, Gladius, Buffalo and Baby 5) to kill his political opponents, kings of kingdoms under the World Government's aegis. Gladius uses his Pop Man<a href="#gladius">\*</a> abilities to fabricate an explosion; he pretends that he survived, and leaves to call for help. When people wonder who he is, no one knows. Buffalo tears apart ships at sea, making it look like hurricanes had destroyed them. Baby 5 poses as a maid, only to transform her fingers into a pistol, killing her target.

Law reveals that Bepo will not be able to join. Apparently, Bepo is resolving a family matter. If Law doesn't allow his subordinate to do what he wants, he will get all mopey and do nothing, bringing down the atmosphere.

However, the plan is to meet up with Shachi and Penguin in Dressrosa, where they will give the next details of the plan.

A message meant for Luffy is delivered to the Sunny. It informs him that Doflamingo is offering the Flame Fruit as a reward for winning this year's competition at the colosseum. Law states this _could_ be a trap, but it may also be legitimate; with Doflamingo, it is hard to know when the truth begins and ends. Not that Luffy cares. Ace's Devil Fruit power was not Ace. What does it matter who has the abilities of the Flame Fruit? However, reading more of the letter, Luffy's eyes pop out and he is hard of breathing. Something in the letter has convinced him to win the Flame Fruit.

Just as they are about to make their plans for approaching the island, they see to their aft three ships pursuing them, led by Doflamingo's Human Traficking forces: Sugar, Giolla and Violet. Sugar's abilities are like Law's: as a Hobby Woman<a href="#sugar">\*</a> (I assume it's a bit of a wisecrack on people who are obsessed with niche hobbies i.e. playing with toys/action figures and are "forever young" through them) her toys only operate within a "room" around her; thus she is always seen carried by her "servants", in a litter or otherwise. (In this way she is essentially a more competent and evil Perona.) In the confusion they get swept by an especially powerful current, throwing massive amounts of water on the ship, disabling the Devil Fruit users.

Law uses his abilities to cut the water in half, keeping himself dry. Momonosuke is about to be tossed overboard; he saves him, and swaps him with Caesar, and rescues his crewmate, the Stand Woman (no name, because I have no knack for funny names as Oda does). She opens up her hand as an umbrella stand, and using the umbrella Law drifts away onto the island, promising the crew they will meet up in Dressrosa some way or another. The rest of the crew is thrown into various parts of the island due to the extremely rapid current, Luffy landing (oh great fortune) in Dressrosa, Usopp rescuing Robin and landing in New Elbaf, Zoro saving Kinemon and Momonosuke landing in the kingdom of the cliffs, Franky landing on his own in the kingdom of islands, Sanji, with Nami's help, steering the Thousand Sunny with Chopper and Brook to safety nearby Green Bit. (As a result of their masteries over these waters, Sugar pursues Luffy, Giolla and Violet the Thousand Sunny, with Violet reaching them first due to her abilities. It would be funny if Sugar gloated over how the young master trusted her exclusively with the captain, wondering what to do with his bounty money. Her snotty attitude makes it all the funnier when she reveals she's actually older than most of the Straw Hats.)

Luffy roams through town, surviving several encounters by residents who want to trick the geek. Luckily for him, he has no money, and he is impervious to any harm they throw at him. Luckily, a blind man, irony of ironies, takes pity on him, and treats him to a massive meal at a famous restaurant. The blind man excuses Luffy for a moment, saying he wishes to partake in some entertainment. However, the man's game of roulette goes awry; his dealers continue cheating him, until Luffy calls them out. As retaliation, Admiral Fujitora subdues his scammers, accidentally destroying a large portion of the bar. Issho says he enjoyed his company, finding one innocent soul to be better company than the thousands of dishonest souls he met in the entire city. But what is one to expect in a pirate port? But now he must away on important matters...

Luffy signs up for the colosseum, scoffed at the whole way through his registration. He wonders what strong fighters will partcipate in the competition.

Before we continue, I want to say: Can we bring back Afro Luffy? I don't much care for Viking Beard Luffy. Give Afro Luffy an Afro Beard as a sign of maturity. (He looks like Jason Ozuma of "Hajime no Ippo".)

In three short, separate stories Franky is impressed with the fleet amassed in the center isles and in turn impresses the rugged men who live their lives over water with his knowledge of shipbuilding. They insist he stay and arm-wrestle with them, then to drink with them, then to dance with them, calling him a sissy if he doesn't partcipate; of course, Franky, who is too cool, does. Finally they reveal they were pulling his leg and their fleet admiral, Orlumbus, will take him to Dressrosa, as he is participating in the colosseum.

Law encounters a pirate band attacking the locals on his way to Green Bit. Caesar taunts Law with having a heart, though Law retorts that the people of this island should be capable of defending themselves. Missionary Gambia tries to grab him, but Law fights back. Gambia does grab Law's arm however, and he mutters about the coolest pirate ever and how you should fly his flag, before he falls unconscious. Law looks around, and sees the Straw Hat's flag everywhere. He makes a face, and tries to walk away before Bartolomeo catches him with his unconscious crewmate. Bartolomeo does not recognize him and threatens violence. It is at this moment the wounded villagers of the town come to apprehend Bartolomeo, but are unable to get through his barrier (not revealed yet). He alternately picks his nose, sleeps and reads comics as they do so; when the villagers have all dispersed, he notices Law has disappeared. He shrugs it off and says he has a competition to catch.

Zoro, Kinemon and Momonosuke are hemmed in by the river; they have been tricked by soldiers into a trap, who are pursuing them so they can sell Momonosuke. They fight off the soldiers, who comment they resemble the mighty samurai of Wano. Kinemon and Momonosuke want to commit seppuku, as they have no chance of getting to Dressrosa; Zoro tells them to knock it off. He wonders how the heck they were tricked, before walking towards the direction of the river, which Kinemon admonishes.

They encounter a massive, destroyed castle, noticing a single light flickering through it. They find a man drenched wearing nothing but a wolf's pelt over his body, his face obscured. They ask him what he's doing there and who he is. He smiles, and says he is nothing but a dog licking his wounds; he doesn't deserve to have a name, except maybe King Nothing (unrelated to Metallica). Zoro mentions they are trying to get to Dressrosa but they are having trouble with the soldiers and the river. The "King" says those are the tactician Dagama's soldiers; they are well-organized and have every spot in the land covered for fear of Doflamingo's assassins. Dagama is so paranoid to have destroyed every bridge leading outside of the kingdom; his puppet king, Elizabello II, is the strongest arm in the land, and destroyed the castle. (Zoro: "He destroyed this castle, eh? I'd like to meet this guy," touching his swords, Kinemon and Momonosuke sweating bullets.) However, the "king" says he too is heading to Dressrosa to prove whether his own life has any worth to itself, and so he shall help them cross the rivers, which he knows like the back of his hand, "all too well." Zoro notes the guy doesn't look like much: he's scrawny from malnutrition, his sword is blunt, and his horse is sick from the moist grasses of the marsh. "King": "You're a warrior, are you not? A warrior's worth is not in his strength, but in how he controls his body and soul in matters of life and death." In any case, he has an idea.

Luffy gets into an altercation with another gladiator, and is assisted by Sai and Boo of the Chinjao Family, who say the patriarch, their grandfather, is sleeping at the moment.

Outside, a citizen is heckling Doflamingo's name for his resignation as a warlord of the sea. Sugar, who happened to be patroling, uses her abilities to change him into a toy, causing everyone to forget about him. Sugar then, to distract the gathered crowd, wonders why the citizens have been so disobedient to not find her favored Thunder Soldier of Rage. "Ten years it has been, and no one yet has found him! I'll have you all strung up for treason!"

Nearby the colosseum the Thunder Soldier has been spotted; he uses his speed to avoid his would-be captors, landing by the colosseum windows. He is about to be shot, when Luffy grabs him. The Soldier thanks Luffy, only to realize Luffy caught him because he was a cool toy. It is at that moment the Soldier recognizes someone. He begs Luffy in helping him to hide; Luffy puts him in his mouth.

Rebecca wants to speak with the gladiator who has been causing such a ruckus; when he says nothing, she interprets this as awed homage to the gladiator statue of the colosseum. No one is sure who he is, but he is remembered as the true champion of the colosseum, before Doflamingo became king. "I look to this statue when I become disheartened in my battles." She then leaves. When Luffy talks to the Thunder Soldier, he mentions that he is that gladiator, Kyros, but no one remembers as "people don't believe in toys." Luffy retorts, "But I know you are, now." Kyros (who doesn't have much of a sense of humor in the original) says, "Well, perhaps that is because you are...a true child in your heart." Kyros wonders at a starry-eyed Luffy, "Maybe he actually is a child at heart."

On Rebecca's character. I don't know if she should be familiar with the Thunder Soldier before the events of this story. It dilutes Thunder Soldier's claim that he has been protecting her all of his life from the shadows, which claim echoes the Steadfast Tin Soldier his character is based on. I think it is okay that Thunder Soldier is surprised that Rebecca turned out to be a lot tougher than he expected her to be. As for Kyros himself, I think it is alright if he's a little rough around the edges, more than he is portrayed in the manga, his daughter inheriting so as well. I will rewrite large portions of the story when we get to those scenes.

One more thing on the soldier. "Or...perhaps certain memories simply cannot die."

In the outskirts of the continent:

Tsuru: Sightseeing, Fujitora?

Fujitora: It is wise to understand the people one is protecting.

Tsuru: Protecting, huh... 10000 weapons sold. 2200 slaves. 87 wars started. The loss in innocent lives... countless.

Tsuru: There's no shred of decency in Dressrosa. I have been pursuing this kid when his head was as high as my knees. I think when this hunt is over, I'll finally laugh myself to the afterlife.

Fujitora: I met one good soul there.

Tsuru: Does one good name clean out that of thousands?

Fujitora: I think you already know the answer to that. My ears have heard the name of Green Bit. I will be making my move there.

Usopp and Robin are running away from the giants in New Elbaf. A flashback reveals that Usopp was excited to meet these giants, but he eventually found them to be greedy and disrespectful of the land, condescending how small things are here. They have been thoroughly corrupted by their proximity to Dressrosa. Usopp rants how real giants are honorable, and runs off to tell another giant, Hajrudin, to stop training his fists on a mountain (looking like Francisco Goya's "El Coloso") causing a huge racket. Hajrudin is partcipating in the colosseum, so the giants are particularly incensed by the humans bothering the champion of New Elbaf. Robin is lucky in that she can create multiple legs, but Usopp is screaming his head off. They enter through a cave, which is a rock to the giants; upon lifting it up, the pursuers find only a hole. They walk away. Meanwhile, it is found Usopp and Robin barely survived the wooden spike trap below. Robin's perceptible eye finds a further passageway beside the spike trap. Where else are they going to go? Back to the giants?

It is not until they are far advanced into the tunnel that Robin surmises that tunnels like these are built to drag deceased prey into shelter, to dress game. Usopp wonders why she didn't tell him that. However, Robin observes that the "dead-end" is covered in six-inch tall holes. She has a suspicion about the people who do the hunting, and the both of them start digging to resolve the mystery. What do you know, they fall into another hole.

The Sunny has landed safely. Chopper and Brook are having snacks. Nami berates them, as they have to plan a counterattack. She tries to call Luffy - the Straw Hats make guessing games as to where he could possibly be: restaurant, women's clothes, cotton candy - but the operator of the colosseum is busy. Violet arrives, alone, asking the Straw Hats for help. The ever-so-compliant Sanji goes, answering her pleas. She needs help taking out her captors. Sanji goes alone; Nami, suspicious, permits it; Sanji wonders if coldness is the absence of love or if it is the heart thawing after a long winter. Violet takes him alone into the jungle, where she makes _multiple_ passes on him.

Robin wakes up unconscious, surrounded by Tontatta in homage to the famous scene with the Lilliputians in "Gulliver's Travels".

The Tontatta, aesthetically, are like Jerry from "Tom and Jerry". I don't like how their fighting style resembles that of termites or bees. I think it's funnier if the Tontatta are walking around, invisible, then whip out a giant hammer from their pockets by which they beat their opponents with. I also like the idea they have Jerry's playfulness. As the Tontatta are essentially dwarves, they can build things just to knock people into them (inefficient, but amusing. A little like JoJo's <a href="https://jojowiki.com/Dododo_De_Dadada" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Dododo De Dadada</a>).

Leo: Hey lady! Stop ya squirmin'!

Leo takes out comically oversized horseshoes and hammers them around Robin's limbs.

As the Tontatta are naive, they easily let her go. She wants to look around, but the Tontattas say she's gotta pay 'em. She promises to pay afterwards; they believe her. As she walks closer to the heart of the village, observing their daily activities, she eventually comes across Usopp, ly-ing his te-eth off. Usopp is the King of Alabasta, the God of Skypiea, the Architect of Water Seven and the Captain of the island-sized ship Thriller Bark. "WooooooOOOooooow!" "'Ey God Usopp, is this yer human?" "Yes." "At least that's the one thing that's (somewhat) true," Robin sighs.

Robin asks if they know where Green Bit is. The Tontattas remark that they do, however it is owned by Doflamingo, "one bad dude." "That there's the land o' the Tontattas, and this punk gone and stole it! We were keepin' that place ready for our friend Noland!" Noland? The Tontattas explain how they came to know Mont Blanc Noland. "That was my next lie," Usopp sweats.

"Well, what about Dressrosa, then?" The Tontattas don't want to talk about Dressrosa. For centuries they have been forced to work on the Dressrosans' buildings and ships as slaves; the only one who released them was the prior king, Riku. In a flashback King Riku bowed, begging for the Tontattas' forgiveness, but they were happy already seeing their friends and family again. In recent times, Doflamingo has been especially zealous in abducting Tontattas for his own use and for public consumption, and so they are extremely hesitant to step into Dressrosa. Usopp: "So long as I live, you'll never be taken in the hands of Doflamingo ever again!" A lie, but a good one. They are determined to show the pair the underground path to Dressrosa, where along the way they show the Tontatta way, which is a lot like the Small World attraction in Disney Land; they literally take a few steps and Leo says, "That's it." Picking his nose, "Yeah it's just dirt and rocks all the way down."

Sanji, predictably, is betrayed by Violet. She mocks him, noting she is a Glare Human, someone who can see into the heart of things. She intentionally separated the toughest person in the crew to overpower him; however, even she did not expect he was unable to fight woman. She scoffs at his weak will, and then peers into his mind to find he is simply a pervert. The crew is about to execute Sanji while Violet gloats about attaining his bounty, when Brook dispatches of them. However, before he would touch Violet, he sits down, quoting Nami: "Let him resolve the issue." Sanji then describes his philosophy concerning women, which touches Violet's heart, as she knows it to be true. Violet confides to the Straw Hats the awful cloud Doflamingo has shadowed over the hearts of the innocent and evil alike. (Sanji is ecstatic that Nami trusted him so much.)

Giolla's crew has found the Sunny. They fire cannons at it; however, they have fired at an illusion created by Nami. Chopper mans his good ol' friend the Brachio Tank which has been upgraded to rotate its neck 360 degrees (add that to your toy line). Giolla admonishes her crew. "Fools! Why use regular cannonballs? Do you not have an _artistic_ flair?" As an Art Woman, she turns her hand into a paintbrush and paints a "Pow!" on a cannonball in the style of Lichtenstein. When the cannonball explodes, half the ship is covered in paint, like a Jackson Pollack painting; subsequently, the ship begins melting. "I'm an Art Woman! I live for art, and art lives for me!!"

Giolla, her hand a paintbrush, declares, "Another masterpiece! No, I have outdone myself! There isn't an artist greater than me!" She has transformed the Sunny and its crew - Nami, Chopper - into a surrealist masterpiece, looking like Picasso's "Guernica". Nami tries to defend herself, and finally resorts to calling for help. Wouldn't you know it, her knight in shining armor arrives - Sanji comes, kicking the Sunny back onto the river. He asks Nami if she can steer; she nods yes. He states Giolla is not their objective, but getting to Luffy is. The river begins to wash away the ship's paint. Giolla ponders, "Shall I make a Giacometti or Rodin out of you, Black Leg?" (Referring to the "Walking Man" sculptures of both.)

There is a small comedic scene where Sanji wonders if he can consider Giolla a woman. "Turnip! Turnip!!" "Dugong, Sanji! She's a dugong!!" Of course, Giolla confuses these for something much more flattering. She turns her leg into a massive ink brush and kicks Sanji. "I've heard you can't kick woman, Black Leg! How unfortunate for you! I myself can't kick any person - but art is different!" She transforms Sanji into kanji, declaring this is her greatest masterpiece so far. She laughs at the crew, taunting them if they think they can avoid her paint because they are over water. She transforms her arms into gouges and cuts the waves into a woodblock. With the Sunny trapped, she transforms into her ultimate form and paints the Sunny into a pointillist masterpiece; nothing is stable anymore, they are crumbling apart like sand. They are about to scatter into the river. Nami: "I always have to clean up after you, Sanji." Her rain cloud forms now, pouring over the Sunny and keeping the sand compacted. "You've ruined my masterpiece! Girl, do you know what you have done?? How about I draw X's over your eyes!" Just as Giolla runs to Nami, lightning strikes, shocking Giolla and breaking the woodcut simultaneously.

The Straw Hats get a much needed sigh of relief as Chopper tries to get ahold of the helm, directing it to Luffy, but very soon they see a shadow looming over the ship.

"King Nothing" is traveling towards the broken bridge to Dressrosa. It is heavily guarded, in spite of its broken state, as this does not deter Devil Fruit users who populate Doflamingo's army. The king's horse pulls behind him a covered wagon. The guard states he must check the goods in the wagon, otherwise Dagama will have reason to execute him. The King decides to bolt; Zoro shouts, "THAT was your plan?" The guards at the bridge gather in formation and point their spears towards the King. "Your horse is badly hurt! It's stumbling on itself!" Even the king is unsure if he can make the jump with the guards. The king merely strokes his horse's neck, begging it, as it has accompanied this foolish master for so long, to follow him just a little longer. The king and his horse become one and they jump over the soldiers and the bridge. The horse collapses, having broken its two front legs. Zoro, in an act of magnanimity, picks up the horse on his shoulders, saying, "You kept up your end of the offer, old man."

Luffy receives a call from Sanji; the Sunny is being pursued by the Big Mom Pirates' flagship, the Queen Mama Chanter. Sanji apologizes, yet asks for a favor: to retaliate against the Big Mom Pirates. Luffy agrees, of course. They promise to be in contact by the end of the month.

Franky, Zoro, Kinemon and Momonosuke gather in Dressrosa. They cannot contact Luffy, as he is on sacred ground. Zoro grunts that they have to do all the important work while Luffy gets to goof off. And where is that damn cook? They meet Shachi and Penguin, who are being ogled by girls as they are members of a crew belonging to a warlord of the sea. However, once Zoro and Franky enter, who have _actual_ bounties, the girls immediately shift their attention to them. I like the idea that Franky transforms into a motorcycle for the girls to "ride" on (:eyes:). One girl is particularly touchy with Zoro; he yells, Who do I look like, that idiot cook? Of course, Kinemon pretends to be modest.

At some point the girls are shooed away. Violet enters. The Heart Pirates ogle at Violet, though they are extremely wary of an elite officer of the Donquixote Pirates. Franky states Sanji vouches for her and she makes her case.

Shachi and Penguin warn them to watch out for their wallets, as this is indeed a pirate port. Onto the matter of business: now that Doflamingo is no longer a warlord of the sea, marine ships have surrounded the island, in hopes of preventing their escape. However, it has been discovered that Doflamingo has somehow persuaded members of the underworld to protect the island with their private armies, potentially moving the headquarters of the Donquixote Pirates to somewhere remote and hidden. Wherever Doflamingo goes, he will bring terror and suffering, enslaving the local populace to work on his SMILE. The time to act is now: kill Doflamingo!

Robin flowers into the meeting room. Someone notes that while he loves beautiful women as anyone would, this is too weird, and their timing could not be any worse. Robin reports that theirs is a complicated story, but she and Usopp have a direct path to Doflamingo's castle _and_ his treasure room, to everyone's shock.

The Thunder Soldier also expresses shock. Everyone looks. "Who the heck are you?!" The Soldier tsk-tsks them, saying children always forget the toys they leave around the room. He states he is an interested party, and that he has met their captain, Straw Hat Luffy - albeit, without the Straw Hat and without the 'f' in his name, maybe this is a case of mistaken identity?... Zoro: "Just get on with it!!" "I know this place inside out - in fact, I know it _too_ well. The rest of your crew is behind two blockades of mercenaries and marines. I say we storm the castle with the help of your associates - once we get inside, I'll show you all of the king's precious toys."

We have arrived at the start of the colosseum games and Law and Doflamingo's meeting. Luffy is distracted by Cavendish, who is giving an _extensive_ account of his adventures. The first block ends. The winner is discovered to be Jesus Burgess, a fighter of an Emperor's crew. Bellamy chats Luffy up - we can extend the dialogue to show that every kid without a name to himself aspires to belong to Doflamingo's family.

Block B, with Bellamy, Elizobello, Dagama, "King" and Bartolomeo, starts.

As a note, every fighter here belongs to the continent, except for those who are clearly pirates (Burgess, Bartolomeo and Cavendish). This is to emphasize the setting as full of fighters thus characterizing it as a "land of passions". Furthermore, as the situation is smaller in scale, every character has an incentive to participate, or not participate, beyond merely surviving or dying. It also solves the weird plot issue of the news reaching all of these New World islands and then their crews launching afterwards in what feels like a few days; the news is relatively local in this well-connected region; Bartolomeo and Cavendish happen to be around, being relatively young; Blackbeard has spies everywhere. A simple answer for Blue Gilly and Ideo is that a favorite pastime of the island is recreational/underground fighting.

When "King Nothing" arrives into the arena, everyone laughs at him for his gaunt body. He prays, "I have done my duty by ensuring my body reaches this once-sacred ground. If I must die, I would do so beside the mighty Kyros. At this chance of a lifetime, heavens grant me the strength to overcome my enemies!" When he removes the wolf's pelt, everyone is astonished: he has regained the physical stature of his prior youth.

Dagama shows his underhanded tactics, protecting Elizobello of the golden arm with paid-for fighters; Bellamy astounds the crowd, a role model for all young pirates-to-be; Bartolomeo taunts the crowd; the "King" does much better than expected, reducing the battle between him and Bellamy; Elizobello destroys the whole arena, only for Bartolomeo to survive due to being a Barrier Human, blasting Elizobello off the arena.

Don Chinjao wakes up, instantly recognizing Luffy as, well, Luffy. They start a fight, following them all the way to the Block C battle.

Luffy punches Hajrudin; the fighting whittles down to Luffy and Don Chinjao; Luffy wins, restoring the Don's famous drill head (no, literally).

Doflamingo sneers at Law, stating the warlord was an ankle-biter the last time he saw him. Law is not sure if handing over Caesar is the right move, but ultimately lets Caesar go. It is at this point Fujitora arrives, balanced on one leg in an impressive fleet of rocks.

Everyone in Dressrosa hates Rebecca. She displays what appears to them to be a condescending attitude to their ways, especially in her refusal to draw blood.

Doflamingo laughs, saying that this is the perfect audience. He fires string bullets at Caesar, attempting to kill him. "This is what you would want me to do, isn't that correct, Admiral of the marines?" "The death of a man with a 300 million Beri bounty is good for us, that is true." Doflamingo explains that he never needed Caesar specifically; he just needed a scientist who can work SMILE. As far as he can see, there are _two_ in front of him, one of whom has governmental immunity.

Law: This is...completely backwards! I have never seen a marine allow a pirate be killed by another in cold blood!

Fujitora: Unfortunately, I only see one pirate here... Everyone else is a citizen of the World Government.

To which Law surmises that Doflamingo is a Celestial Dragon. Doflamingo laughs to high heavens. A pirate who is not a pirate! A noble who is not a noble! "I have always lived in-between the lines. That is the key to my success!"

Fujitora: If, however, I saw a citizen attack another, I would have no choice but to defend the innocent.

Doflamingo: Hee hee hee! More than the sight of blood or the sound of bones breaking, I love watching the plans of a fool collapse. I have this whole island surrounded! Arm dealers! Tyrants! Assassins! They all answer to my call! All for the purpose of acquiring _your_ talent, Law! You are family to me!

I'll cover Issho's feat with the meteor here, as it is one of the more memorable scenes of the manga. I desire to remove Doflamingo from it, focusing on Law. Issho summons a massive meteor. The Stand Woman hands two swords to Law, who uses them to cut the meteor into chunks. Then, she throws a flurry of knives into the sea. At the last moment, Law swaps the meteor pieces with the knives; the meteors descend into the ocean, causing an immense tsunami, while the knives miss the Heart Pirates. The Stand Woman throws knives in random directions: Law swaps Doflamingo with the knives on the ground, in a massive game of whack-a-mole. The wave comes down, soaking the fighters in knee-high water.

It is revealed that losing gladiators have been taken to a cistern beneath the colosseum to recover from their wounds; purportedly, the sight and sound of the tranquil waters here are enough to sooth any injury. The "King" is perplexed, but says nothing.

Commiserating with their miseries, Tank, a former commander of Dressrosa's army, recognizes the "King" to actually be the former King Riku. "I am not a king of anything." "That's not true! You're still my king." "I know no other King of Dressrosa. When the people of the south rebelled, there was only one man who calmed them. When pirates invaded, there was only one man who answered my call. That man is the true king of Dressrosa!" Elizobello proclaims. "That's all well and good for you old-timers, but the name of Dressrosa stinks with death and suffering. All I have heard of this 'king' is that he rolled the red carpet for Doflamingo!" "Are you kidding? The blood of the average Dressrosan is poison. They always keep one hand crossed behind their back and a knife in the other," Hajrudin retorts. "Please..." King Riku finally takes off his helmet, "I don't want to hear anymore. Your words hurt me more than swords could." At this, the soldiers of Dressrosa kneel to the former king.

No one had noticed Gladius. He explodes, causing the sole entrance to the cistern to be blocked off, with himself on the other side. "The young master hates losers. If he had the strength, he'd turn this pity party upside down. Alas, you're all worthless, unusable material to him. But what a boon it is we have so many members of royalty here. As Dressrosans are aware... this is no recovery room. This is a tomb!" At this Pica closes the walls around them; the waters in the cistern drown the Devil Fruit users, and the rest are barely struggling to keep the walls away. Their last look in life is Pica's stoic face.

The Thunder Soldier recounts the history of Dressrosa - King Riku was considered foolish for his overtures for peace, despite the army the country's strongest in history. As a person, he was unsure whether a man ought to be strong or kind. In spite of this, many citizens had not forgotten the numerous attacks by other kingdoms for the country's surplus in wealth; furthermore, countries in the New World have to be tough to survive. To which he countered, Shall we always hold our riches in one hand and a knife in the other? He had considered even tearing down the sacred colosseum, where men proved their worth, as strength alone was not the sole measure of merit. Doflamingo fostered hate between the Dressrosans and the other peoples on the continent by stoking the grudges of the small, then orchestrated a temporary alliance among all of the kingdoms by pretending to be a "disinterested" third party, providing weapons to the armies and, most importantly, proving his ownership of the throne by showing his bloodline. As the alliance razed the capital, the Donquixote Pirates appeared as saviors, repelling the invaders. Doflamingo is more in the image of the ideal Dressrosans than King Riku is. In the heat of the moment, he urges the citizens to claim their own freedom, and to not be oppressed by tyrants. He produces the smoking gun: King Riku had planned this whole invasion out, as he felt it is better being the citizen of another country than the king of this one. He convinces them to kill the royal family in a bid for their freedom, with his own crew firing the first shots. He then enters the city in a mighty triumph, showing the extreme wealth of his pirate crew, thus solidifying the new Donquixote Dynasty. King Riku spent his remaining days questioning who really fomented the war; everyone he spoke to, in some shape or form, stated it was his fault, foreigners saying he was too gentle with his citizens and too lenient to Doflamingo, Dressrosans saying he plainly conspired. He eventually concluded that he indeed was the one to blame, and atoned by exiling himself, an eternal wanderer. (Obviously, Franky is touched by this story and perhaps writes a song. Or, since Franky is a bit big for a guitar, I propose his chest opens up for an electric piano.)

Back to Law and Doflamingo. Doflamingo tricks Law into attacking a string puppet, and sneaks up behind the Stand Woman. In front of their eyes Doflamingo rapidly tailors a dress for her using the Parasite String, which controls the muscles in her body. "Your cute subordinate!! My puppet forever! There are fates worse than death, huh?!" Law rages, trying to kill Doflamingo, but Doflamingo, manipulating his muscles through strings, runs behind Law and cuts his arm in half with his Leg Saw. He then ties Law and the Stand Woman together, where she stabs him in the stomach in the gut.

Doflamingo: If I can't be king, if I can't be a warlord, then you shall have to act in my place!

Doflamingo: What do you say, Admiral Fujitora?

Doflamingo points his shoe at Issho, gesturing him. Issho kneels down, kissing his feet. "What is good to you is good in my eye, lord."

Before we conclude the battle in Block D, let us discuss Cavendish. I have issues with his bounty and his alter-ego. A bounty reflects to what extent an individual is a threat to the World Government; Eustass Kid is not necessarily stronger than Luffy, nor is Basil Hawkins stronger than Zoro. Both are well involved with the underworld, which makes them more desirable for the Government to control. Cavendish seems to be a rather peaceful individual; unless he threatens kingdoms because of his incredible beauty, which could be funny, he poses no problems and, despite his strength, would have a much lower bounty, on par with Crocodile who himself was much stronger than his bounty conveyed. His alter-ego just...exists. Not that there needs a ballad for every character, but the alter-ego is very boring too, just making Cavendish faster. Either Hakuba is a curse on a level separate from the Devil Fruits, which could be interesting to explore, or Hakuba is in fact the result of a Devil Fruit. For conservation of the story, I say Cavendish unknowingly ate a Zoan Fruit - becoming either a Weasel Human or a Grim Reaper Human. Cavendish abhors all forms of ugliness in his waking life, and in his sleeping life he dreams of being a monster, which unintentionally activates the transformation. Cavendish believes everyone before they learn how to swim sinks like a hammer, and so he has never learned how to swim, though he commends people who can. Everyone _except him_ understands he has caused widespread destruction, only the women in the islands he visits continue letting him, arguing "How can a cutie like him be that monster?" For Cavendish's part, he thinks his bounty is so high because he is a Pied Piper of women (which is...a bit of an exaggeration).

Cavendish ends the battle in Block D after being knocked unconscious. Only Rebecca sees him and, as if handling a raging bull, throws her cape at him; Cavendish grabs onto the cape and sleeps peacefully in it, pretending he is sleeping in his mother's lap. With that, Rebecca is the winner.

The colosseum's finale will be held the next day amongst all the winners, the king of Dressrosa participating. Sabo takes over for Luffy, so Luffy can meet up with the rest of the Straw Hats.

Giolla is dragged into a darkened room inhabited by Doflamingo, Sugar, Gladius, and Diamante (a fake-out, where the audience is led to believe Giolla is being punished). Doflamingo presents a mannequin to the group.

Sugar: It should be cute.

Gladius: It should pop out.

Diamante: Everyone loves the appearance of a red-blooded hero!

Giolla: T-the color should be perfect!

Doflamingo: It needs to have qualities fit for a king. Yes...long live the king!

Doflamingo subtly lingers his finger on the mannequin's spine. The room laughs. We see Law and the Stand Woman are crucified in the basement of the castle.

Some scenes of Luffy hanging out with his friends after a long absence. In typical Luffy fashion, when he hears of plans of attacking in the dark and going from Point A to Point B, he predictably runs out immediately towards Doflamingo's castle. As the Heart Pirates are debating about stopping him, Zoro and Frank essentially shrug their shoulders and follow Luffy's suit.

They find Issho sitting in front of the castle. Luffy asks him why he defends Doflamingo. "Heaven and earth can't be moved." "You're worried that stopping Doflamingo will lead you to being blamed, even if you think you were right. If you won't do it, step aside and let me!!" He says, "I...abhor violence. Can you claim the same, Straw Hat Luffy? Not long ago, Marineford, the bastion of justice, crumbled. But your conscience is not weighed down by it.

"Men should engage in words. But I don't think ya'll are comfortable with words. Show me your conviction."

They fight. Only detail I want to add is that Fujitora deflects Franky's laser by dramatically increasing the mass of a rock (see: <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravitational_lens" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Gravitational lens</a>). Issho says he has seen enough. Luffy may pass through. But, he says, I warn you, there are things you ought not see. Why the sudden change of heart? Zoro sneers, but the admiral does not respond.

Jumping to the throne room, Luffy sees Law sitting in the throne room. He is wearing the garment the Donquixote Pirates have made for him, completely possessing him in body, but not entirely in soul. Beside him is the Stand Woman in a Heart uniform. Luffy asks what had happened to Law, Doflamingo, and their alliance, which Law simply refutes and says he is assuming the role of ruler of Dressrosa, seeing much more benefits being allied with the Donquixote Pirates than with the trifling Straw Hats. "As you recall... pirates should not trust one another." Zoro wants to shut Law up, but Luffy stops him. "No, he's right. Pirates shouldn't trust one another." As a courtesy Law offers for the Straw Hats to leave the city peacefully, which Luffy accepts.

The next day Doflamingo coronates Law by proving his bloodline. A parade is set up for Law's ascension.

The parade proceeding towards the colosseum, it encounters an obstacle of a large mass of people; it is not shown who they are. Though we assume they are the Straw Hats, they are actually the Heart Pirates who, because of the towering Yetis from Punk Hazard, look especially intimidating. They are asked to disperse; the messenger is smashed into a building by a Yeti. Shachi and Penguin ask Law about his dream of becoming king of the pirates and their dream of finding the One Piece, to which he retorts that they were all worthless to him, merely pawns towards his ascendancy. They should be happy for him, he argues. Shachi and Penguin say clearly: You lie! If you want us gone, get rid of us yourself! Law descends from his moat and slices his entire crew, leaving them in shambles. However, their feet still stick to the ground. "It doesn't matter how we look. We'll stay here until you've become serious getting rid of us."

Law enters the colosseum, ready for battle. Rebecca is incensed that Doflamingo himself is not fighting, calling him a coward. Law asserts that, as Doflamingo's successor, she will be fighting Doflamingo and more. The Stand Woman participates.

A flashback. Law, as a little boy, is seen carted away in a pile of corpses.

Trebol and Diamante are grumbling about the difficulty of a request of Doflamingo's: a kid, smart, with medical knowledge preferred, whose past can easily be erased. Law comes into view and asks if they are pirates. They respond yes. He wants to join them. They are surprised as kids rarely want to join their crew; interviewing him, he finds he meets Doflamingo's criteria.

However, they warn him that the lives of pirates are cruel, and that pirates themselves must be cruel in return. At this moment, Corazon enters, beating Law to shreds. Trebol and Diamante only watch; to the surviving Law, they state that's what being a pirate is: strong or the victim of the strong. "I don't care about what you believe in. I don't believe in anything anymore." Law says he won't live to the age of 10. The duo grin: this kid's got it.

At a dinner, Law reveals he has White Lead Disease; the Donquixote Pirates, very small and familial at this time, freak out, though Doflamingo himself stops them and demands them to be respectful. "First of all, the disease is but a rumor. Second, there is no disrespect among _family_, even if it kills you." Doflamingo then recounts the story of Law's hometown, which had been ravaged by disease and war, with that immoral, biting tone of his. Law is nearly furious that his family's deaths can be told in such a callous way, to which Doflamingo compensates by telling his own story: he had been born to a wealthy family, who foolishly renounced their wealth only to be killed by peasants out for vengeance (he purposely does not reveal he was a Celestial Dragon). "Those dirt farmers blamed _children_ for their inability to feed their own children; their idea of justice was to shed blood for blood. At the height of their passions, no one thinks, 'I am evil.' There is no such thing as evil! I am glad my father died; his death freed me and opened my eyes."

"Family, huh?" Law later finds Corazon alone and stabs him below the heart (had he been inches higher, he would have killed him). It is revealed Corazon chooses not to retaliate against Law for this act of attempted homicide.

Law's new "family" teaches him skills in medicine, survival and fighting and takes him on missions involving the worst of humanity. To Law, none of this matters - he only believes in his own death, which soon will be come in a month. As a result, he reveals to Baby 5 and Buffalo, during a time of recreation, that his full name is Trafalgar D. Water Law, should they ever need to put anything on his tombstone. Corazon overhears and reveals he can indeed talk.

Corazon warns Law to never tell Doflamingo about his name - if he does, he really _will_ kill him, as Doflamingo would find a fate worse than death for Law.

Later, Doflamingo asserts he knows something is going through Law's mind, and asks that he confide in him as he would a father - as he _is_ his father. Law is about to speak, but decides to attribute it to a momentary headache. Looking back on it, Corazon's care reminded him of the care of his true, biological father.

Corazon abducts Law to cure him. When the doctor, one of the most famous in all of the seas, refuses to treat Law due to the rumors concerning his disease, Corazon viciously beats him. Law tries to stop him - he has acquired a victim mentality at this point - but Corazon asserts that pirates are free to do what they wish. This reminds Law of his first meeting with Corazon, realizing his elder was trying to protect him from the life of violence they were leading. Corazon calls the doctor a piece of shit and says doctors should suffer for their patients. The townspeople gather and try to stop Corazon, but his rage is endless: there's no excuse for a man to let a child suffer and there's no excuse for anyone to let him do so.

Later that night, as he reflects on the heartlessness of the town and Law's silence, he realizes that Law is the one who truly can't speak, about his pain and his fears, and cries for the boy; Law overhears and grows closer to Corazon.

Doflamingo contacts Corazon, stating he is about to acquire the Operation Fruit, which they can then use to cure Law, as he is several steps ahead of his brother. He reveals he had been training Law to assume the abilities of the fruit all this time. Let's rendezvous at the meeting point. Corazon is happy for Law, but Law, though understanding he is being selfish, says he does not want to be Doflamingo's henchman. Corazon looks at him sternly, and says Law is free to be whoever he wants to be. "Even I do not feel he is my own brother, though we were born to the same mother. Let's steal it."

Corazon intercepts the Devil Fruit before Doflamingo can make contact with the seller, but is fatally wounded upon delivering it to Law. Law eats the fruit, yet his knowledge of medicine is sadly too small to truly save Corazon's life. Vergo, who has recently begun his undercover career as a Marine, finds the pair and realizes Law is trying to leave the crew. He viciously beats Law. Corazon recovers only slightly, and begins to taunt Vergo for beating up a child. He then reveals he himself was a Marine this whole time, and insults Doflamingo's name, saying his "master" is an idiot for not discovering he had a spy in his own midst, that Doflamingo will always be the child executed by the indignant many, that the only people who could love him are the people he has to kidnap and how only someone "really goddamn stupid" like Vergo could put so much blind faith on someone like Doflamingo, as if he was throwing his life away on the dirty streets. Vergo, enraged, beats Corazon to death, allowing Law to escape. Corazon feels he deserves this death, for all the beatings he has administered to kids, all for naught, though he strangely feels no pain (perhaps this is Law's doing).

Doflamingo, to satisfy his own craving for blood, especially after losing the Devil Fruit, creates the Bird Cage. Law, seeing the walls close around him, is frightened that he will lose the life Corazon fought so bitterly to save. However, the blood thirst is quenched when Vergo offers Corazon's barely living body. Doflamingo: "If you don't want to be my brother, you're just trash to me." He tortures Corazon; upon his death, Doflamingo is satisfied and releases the Bird Cage. Another miracle by Law's mentor.

Back to the battle. Bartolomeo doesn't seem particularly experienced in battle, so he loses first. Law pulls Rebecca's heart before pushing her off the edge, giving the crowd their fill of violence. He crushes it.

It is down to three contestants. Burgess attacks Law, but he dodges; the resultant blasts of air hit the colosseum stands, causing casualties. Sabo is disgusted. He lunges at Burgess's face, who merely laughs, stating his style of fighting isn't Straw Hat's, isn't the Marines', and isn't any pirate's that he knows of. Sabo states, You've got that right! These are hands never seen in the seas before - justice!" Sabo's grip crushes Burgess's skull, to his surprise; he stumbles off the arena, leaving Law and Sabo behind.

But to everyone's shock, Law cuts himself - right above the heart, in the spine. With this, the arena falls; Sabo, ever the gentleman, saves Law, rests him on the broken arena and asks him why he did so. "I've lost the reason why I became a surgeon." Sabo feels the string in Law's spine and laments on the cruelty Doflamingo has inflicted on innocent people. He begs for a doctor - just a doctor, anyone! "No, only a surgeon could do it... A very good one. Someone with excellent dexterity."

It is discovered that the entire castle has silently sunk into the ground.

King Riku enters the arena, holding Rebecca in his arms; he states that he may possess such a quality, if they permit him to operate without any knowledge, so long as he saves Rebecca after. Law assents; he'll give him all the instructions. "But why would you help the friend of your enemy?" "It doesn't matter. You are human! If we lose our humanity, then we truly have nothing." With Law's instructions, King Riku miraculously pulls the string out of Law's spine, freeing him from Doflamingo's control. Law takes over the rest; using his materials, he patches up the wound and stabilizes himself so he can stand.

Law states that the cut to Rebecca's heart was clean and he did not truly "smash" it - Doflamingo really did not understand how his Devil Fruit abilities work. However, she needs a new heart quickly or she will lose her life. King Riku immediately offers to give his own. The audience, to their, and our, surprise, offers their own hearts; the kingdom's seniors offer to compensate for the foolishness of their younger years, and the younger people offer the hearts of Burgess's victims (a little messed up, but their hearts, no pun intended, are in the right place).

Law is touched by this heart-jerking sentiment, but he has a better proposal: yes, he did say she needed a heart, but it was just as easy to create a heart, given his unique abilities. So long as everyone present in the arena gives up some tissue - equivalent to one year of their life - he can reconstruct a heart for her. At this everyone tears up: thank God! That's all that's required.

Rebecca is healed. She apologizes to King Riku for leaving him alone, and that she was unable to be the daughter he lost in the war. He holds her tightly. "You are my daughter!"

It is revealed that the armies of the kingdoms of the continent have arrived, with the intent of destroying Dressrosa for the assassination of their princes.

Sabo reveals he had the Flame Fruit the whole time, knowing full well that Doflamingo had no intentions of really giving it away; yet, though his subordinates stole it, he still felt he need to fight to be qualified. "You won't mind if I take this treasure, King of Dressrosa?" "Treasure? I don't want to look at it. That thing is a curse! May it give you more blessings than it had for its victims."

Law quickly heals the Stand Woman and walks away from the arena. "Where are you going?" Law simply flashes the knuckles of his hands: DEATH. "What about you?" "I'm alive today by the hands of individuals greater than I." It is revealed that the fighters of the colosseum - Hajrudin, Elizobello, Dagama, Ideo, Chinjao - gave up their lives protecting King Riku, holding the walls of stone in place despite breaking their bones; when he awakens in the center, he sees that their bodies have nearly merged with the stone, like caryatids. "Their sacrifices were not in vain!"

The Marines close in on the continent, beginning the hunt for Doflamingo. Marines and members of the underworld are slaughtered, blood running out in rivers. The underworld uses chemical weapons. Tsuru's crew surrounds Doflamingo's ship, the Numancia Flamingo. "You idiots, you think he's really going to use this as his getaway? This is a distraction!"

Doflamingo is enjoying a glass of wine as Pica steers the castle to their location of escape. Whether Law lives or dies is very unimportant to him, in the long run. "I can always go back to Dressrosa and have my fill of food, wine and women. I can find any scientist to make SMILE for me. I can indoctrinate any child to eat the Operation Fruit for me. I will live forever. Here's to my endless holiday!"

The Straw Hats are revealed as having snuck into the basement of the castle. Their first stop: Doflamingo's treasure room, which is a stock room of Devil Fruits, real ones too, not just imitation SMILEs. They find a pamphlet describing each of them. Thunder Soldier, Violet and the Tontattas attest how many lives were lost and blood spilt for these fruits. Franky and Zoro hold one in their hands knowingly. "Are you sure about this, Luffy?" Luffy nods. The Straw Hats begin crushing the fruit, their juices soaking the floor. No one should eat these fruits; it would be a disgrace to the lives lost.

The Straw Hats begin wrecking the castle. Franky asks Luffy to "do that thing where you knocked out all the guys." Luffy says he can't do it; he's saving all his energy to fight Doflamingo. "So your _haki_ is a lot like my cola?" "Yeah, except it refills over time, except when I eat, that's when it comes back immediately." "Okay," Zoro deadpans.

Usopp, Robin and Franky are trying to make their way to the castle's roof; Luffy and Zoro attempt to stop the castle. Luffy and Zoro fight Gladius and Baby 5; Usopp, Robin and Franky are chased by Sugar and Trebol; the Thunder Soldier, as luck would have it, fights the bodyguards of the crew: Diamante, Lao G, Machvise, Senor Pink and Dellinger. He struggles, chip after chip being broken from him.

The Thunder Soldier is Kyros, as we recall. Kyros as a boy murdered two men as vengeance for a friend. The two men happened to be extremely influential members of Dressrosa. No one forgives Kyros; they in fact call him cowardly for attacking them while their backs were turned. Only King Riku has compassion - he cannot forgive Kyros as blood does not pay for blood, but Kyros is free to prove his worth through the colosseum, where their ancestors had tested their fortune before.

Kyros wins match after match, yet continues partcipating in spite of winning everyone's grudging respect. Kyros fights multiple times a day, in spite of rain or snow, in spite of sickness; in just seven years, he has netted 3000 victories, an unfathomable number that causes people to believe he is the embodiment of their ancestors' will. Kyros confides to King Riku, saying that his blood boils every day, unable to quieten its lust for violence; yet after fighting for so long, he has come to despise bloodshed. He is not sure what to do; he wants to die as an animal.

The next day, King Riku fights Kyros himself. They clash; they seem uneven, until Kyros makes a decisive blow. Yet King Riku stands up; blow after blow, he continues getting up. He smiles. "Kyros, this is what you wanted, isn't it? An opponent worthy of you. Beat me until you are satisfied. When your arms ache, I will give you the absolution you are seeking." Kyros drops his sword and cries. King Riku holds him. "You're no monster!... The pain in my muscles knows this. Kyros, your blood, the blood that flows through me, was asking you all these years to forgive yourself!"

Kyros eventually marries the king's daughter, who gives birth to Rebecca. He finds himself incapable of stopping the mob executing the royal family, lest he in his rage kill the people King Riku so dearly loved. In his anger he attempts to strike Doflamingo, but Sugar intercepts him. As a toy, everyone has forgotten him; his wife dies in his arms, not recognizing him.

From the day Kyros was transformed into the Thunder Soldier, he has been protecting Rebecca. However, when she was no longer a child, she no longer believed in the Thunder Soldier, and slowly began to forget who he was. One day Rebecca is hurt by captors; her captors laugh when the Thunder Soldier tries to fight back, taunting his status as a toy. He sees in Rebecca's eyes she thinks the same way too. It is at this moment King Riku, in his "King Nothing" disguise, saves Rebecca, and recounts to Thunder Soldier, actually Kyros, how he had lost his entire family in one night; since that night, his suffering hurts him so badly he doesn't even have enough strength to grieve. Hoping for some atonement he offers to adopt Rebecca, whom he does not recognize is his granddaughter. Since then he has watched the pair from afar, following them to every island on the continent, giving his daughter gifts during her birthday and the holidays. King Riku trained his granddaughter in his unique fighting style upon the perilous cliffs, useful when she would fight in the narrow confines of the gladiator arena. Eventually King Riku himself became too weak to fight off her captors; she instead takes his place and defeats them. She demands she be sold as a slave to the colosseum rather than as a slave for her beauty; she'll make Doflamingo more money that way. The Thunder Soldier still looked after her despite her intense loneliness in the cruel Dressrosa; around this time, Sugar became aware her rarest toy was seen in the island and wanted to recover him.

"The rage of my king, who has endured several lifetimes of suffering, the rage of his people, who can only laugh at their sickness, the grief of my daughter, who has never held the hand of her real father...are all lesser to my rage! The thunder of the heavens is not enough to express it!

"The day I renounce this tin semblance shall be a day of storms!"

Law restores the bodies of his crew, and commands them to get their galleon flight-worthy. He asks for their forgiveness, which they obviously give.

King Riku prostrates himself before the armies. He begs himself to take his life over his citizens' lives, beating his head so often on the ground it begins to bleed. "You're a relic. What justice would be had if we took your life?" "The truth is, this is my fault. Please, don't take your anger on them. I did not instruct my people in the right ways! Punish me for my flaws." The citizens of Dressrosa - who are alive and have not gone with the Donquixote Pirates - prostrate themselves with King Riku, begging them not to punish their king, for their foolishness as his subjects. They hesitate.

The gladiators of Dressrosa arrive. Sai sneers. "How cruel must you all be for demanding so much from innocent people? Any human being would forgive them." King Riku is surprised, asking them how they lived. "We're men of the sea! We're made of tougher stuff. And we won't let this go idly! Donquixote Doflamingo must know...we don't take kindly to scoundrels!" They command their respective armies to set sail against the Donquixote Pirates.

Shachi and Penguin are riding "Ucy", the renowned Fighting Bull, and Agyo, the renowned Fighting Lion, asking if they can keep them. "And you're going to feed them? And replace their poop?" "Well..." "I can take a piece of everyone's brains to make them smarter, but everyone will lose a few IQ points." "Umm..." "I'm kidding," he says, and gives them the ability of speech.

Law lifts the ship up with his powers, but he is clearly gravely weakened by the surgery. Issho is discovered resting on the fore of the ship, mildly stating he'll take them to their destination, seeing that Law put so much effort in putting the ship in the air.

Usopp, Robin and Franky are having trouble getting through Trebol, who, as a Mucus Human, dampens any attack they try; at the same time, Sugar creates bombs out of bees, commanding them to fly at the Straw Hats. Her army of toys also assist her. Sugar is quick enough to stab Robin's hands when they appear. There is a moment where Franky can distract the toys by posing; no one is sure what the science behind this is, exactly. They are stuck at the bottom floor of the castle which is massive enough to hold ships, and indeed will be the future site of their own miniature SMILE plant, while they are hurting for a permanent facility. Trebol has covered every door with mucus. Though the Straw Hats try to hide out in the unconstructed plant, Trebol throws a ship at them. Franky instructs Usopp and Robin to get on the ship; then, using a Coup de Vent to shoot them to the upper floors. Trebol tries to follow them, but Franky uses another Coup de Vent (a "Franky ACHOO!"), flicking Trebol like a booger.

Sugar pursues them by transforming her toys into pogo-sticks. Trebol follows soon after, claiming to have dispatched of Franky. Robin, as reluctant as he is to do this, blooms a giant nose, sucking Trebol in; then, using giant hands, blows Trebol away onto Sugar.

Franky transforms into a cannon, which Usopp aims so that it runs perpendicular to the ground. They fire: the mortar pierces layers of dirt and stone into the sky, exploding into a firework of the Straw Hats' flag.

Issho, seeing the firework, points to the ground, and simply moves his finger up.

He lifts up the entire castle, which has been transformed into an immense ship by Pica. The ship lands on dry ground, stranded.

The armies cannot move, as Pica the day before dramatically altered the landscape, slowing down the flow of the river substantially. They curse Doflamingo's name.

Sugar transforms Robin into a toy. Usopp tries to deploy a special bug on Sugar, but Sugar counters, trapping Usopp in a trap of toys. Sugar laughs, and asks him what the bug does. "It's a bug...that inflicts unimaginable pain! Keep it away from me!" A sadist through and through, she flicks it at Usopp. It pierces into Usopp's skin with its piercers, causing his eyes and tongue to pop out; Sugar, frightened beyond her wits, passes out, returning all of her toys to their human state. It is revealed that Usopp calls the bug the "Heart Attack", as its toxin induces a heart attack in its victim; but the appearance of the victim causes an even worse heart attack on its witnesses.

The Thunder Soldier is returned to his human state as Kyros. As he promised, an immense storm takes over the continent. It allows the ships to move and washes away Trebol's mucus. Franky, finding Trebol to be a frail old man, punches him into the side of the ship.

Kyros incapacitates Dellinger and Machvise, but still struggles with the more experienced fighters.

Law's ship crashes in the midst of the colosseum fighters. Law commands his crew to wreck havoc. He recognizes Kyros as the legendary gladiator and the king's guard. "I've got a grudge, _especially_, against these guys, for setting me up for their dog and pony show. Pirates are free to do whatever they want, no?" Law transforms himself into Kyros' missing leg. "A good surgeon needs a good assistant! And I intend to cut out Doflamingo!"

Kyros defeats everyone but Diamante (humorously he corrects Lao G's spine, then breaks it again). He comments that he is now restored to perfect health. Law explains that he is ensuring a healthy flow of blood and nutrients into the rest of his body. As a good doctor, Law recommends a juice break - they both take a minute to acquire some necessary vitamins.

Diamante is a Flag Human. He is invulnerable to blunt weapons and can wrap himself around his opponents, surprising them. Perhaps he is very light as well. Still, this is not a really profound ability. I add onto these by saying he can tie the bodies of people he has defeated around his body, like flags - when someone hits him, they really hit those bodies. This is all the worse as these flags are former soldiers of Dressrosa. Of course, because of Law's surgical skills and Kyros' dexterity, they cut the seams around the flags, rendering Diamante naked - and defeated.

Franky and Senor Pink box, which suits Senor Pink's style better. They engage in a contest of manliness.

Baby 5 becomes the ultimate weapon: a tank, piloted by the Donquixote Pirates. Gladius uses his Pop Man abilities to yo-yo himself towards the Straw Hats and back into a cannon. Luffy and Zoro are blocked until Law's crew comes in. Gladius, clever, pops Luffy into the basement.

Pica is concentrating. Below the ship he constructs a massive stone body, grabbing onto the ship and throwing it onto a waterway, reinvigorating the Donquixote Pirates' escape. He has prepared for the worst case scenario; though everyone can see where the ship is going now, he can better protect his crew by walking alongside it.

The armies are approaching the castle-ship; using harpoons, they grapple it, trying to pull it back. Pica tries to smash them apart. Just as Issho is aiming an attack on the giant, he is called by the Elders to hunt down Sabo, who was "recently" discovered in Dressrosa. Issho is disheartened by their heartlessness towards justice in this area, but nonetheless complies, as Tsuru's fleet is closing in on the Donquixote Pirates' escape. Zoro wonders how he can cut down a giant.

Kyros and Law enter the throne room. It is empty. Kyros searches; Law advises him to be careful. Beneath the cushion of the throne Doflamingo unravels himself, cutting Kyros gravely, only for Kyros to cut Doflamingo in the throat, yet only partially. This is the first time Doflamingo has been uneasy this entire story. "H-hey, wait a minute..." The ferocity and speed of Kyros' sword swings stuns Doflamingo who is barely able to dodge, defend or unravel his strings in time. The round table of the throne room is obliterated. Kyros feints, to kick (as we recall, Law is his left foot) - Law extends his cursed sword, piercing through Doflamingo causing an immense shock.

"Okay, that was pretty good -" Kyros kicks Law towards Doflamingo, who cuts him into pieces. Law asks if there's anything left to laugh about. His two mortal enemies, assembled into the same room, beyond his expectations - the boy he had been grooming to be his heir and the man he had wronged by destroying his family.

"Hee hee hee! That's a good story!" The Doflamingo pieces laugh. "The truth really is all in how you tell it. I'm a lot of things to a lot of different people!! I've been a devil and a savior! I merely see myself as a survivor."

So said, the Doflamingo string clones unravel from the tapestries and the seat cushions.

Violet, using her ability as an Insight Human, is staring down Trebol's soul, preventing him from moving. Trebol curses Violet, stating he always believed she was disloyal to the family.

Luffy is in on the bottom floor, where Bellamy is awaiting him. He states that Doflamingo promised to accept him into his family if he brings the head of Straw Hat. Luffy simply states he doesn't want to fight Bellamy. Bellamy laughs at him, asserting this is not about Doflamingo, but an "image" - even if that image is wrong, that does not mean his attempt to reach that image is wrong. Luffy understands what Bellamy is saying through this exchange of words, and defeats Bellamy, in a reversal of the fight in Jaya.

The other pirates try to fight the stone giant Pica. Zoro is trying to help them by running to the opposite end of the ship, but he keeps getting lost. Just as Pica is about to smash the ships into smithereens, massive insects begin bursting out of the stone frame. It is revealed that Usopp's bag of bugs spilled open when he became unconscious. These stone-breaking bugs are a minor setback for Pica, but the Tontattas recognize this as the work of "Usoland"; everyone calls him a hero, "God Usopp". This lapse allows the pirates to get on board, setting up conflicts ranging from Sai versus Baby 5, Chinjao versus Lao G, Hajrudin versus Machvise and et cetera and et cetera and so on and so on.

Speaking of Baby 5, we are aware of her reformation in the manga. I propose that, keeping in theme with this rewrite, we have Doflamingo's other "children" reform as well, or at least given a chance to reform. They were brainwashed very early on in age, after all. Dellinger could easily join Ideo and Blue Gilly thanks to his bloodthirstiness. Buffalo, whose neck is snapped by Kyros in the manga, which is a pretty cool scene if not a bit violent, could join Orlumbus, who could use someone of Buffalo's talent for navigating the seas, or even be a guard of Dressrosa. Or he is the rotten egg of the bunch and is thrown into Impel Down with the rest of Doflamingo's crew. In any case, I do like the idea that Doflamingo gets his final comeuppance by having his "family" stolen from him.

"Ucy", who can talk now, offers to take Zoro to a better vantage point to defeat Pica.

Doflamingo reconstructs himself. The string clones are about to execute Kyros and have backed Law into a corner. Doflamingo observes how similar his and Law's abilities are - that they rely on using other people to maximize their potentials. "Yet unlike you, I have 'awakened' my abilities... All of nature shall be subjected to my strings." He converts the room, down to the roof, into string, weaving them into string clones. "That is the quality of a king!" He unleashes a massive burst of Supreme King's _haki_, knocking out a great many of the pirates on board the ship, including his own. "Without an 'assistant', you are through, Law."

"I think I will kill _him_, because it is funny, but _you_, your damn Operation Fruit is just too valuable. I don't even think of you as family anymore." He spits on Law. "I have heard a most intriguing story...or should I say, horrific!...that a man does not have to eat a _fruit_ to inherit someone's powers...do you get my drift?!" The clones pin him down, about to cut him into chunks.

At this point, Luffy breaks into the room. Luffy comments on Law's beaten state, but he replies there is no time; let's do _that_ thing. Law merges into Luffy's back. "The doctor is in." Law ensures Luffy has enough nutrients and blood in his body to activate both Gear Second and Gear Third at once without the drawbacks, obliterating the Doflamingo clones until only the true Doflamingo is left. In fact, it looks like Law is riding a high-end motorcycle, overwhelming his rivals with sheer horsepower alone. The ship quakes from Luffy's blows, such that everyone thinks heaven is throwing lightning bolts at Doflamingo's ship.

The ship is about to enter the mouth of the river; once it passes the delta, it will enter the sea and make its successful getaway.

Luffy mentions Bellamy to Doflamingo, asking whether it was true he intended to accept Bellamy as his brother. Doflamingo doesn't even remember Bellamy's name, but he was a good distraction, yes? Luffy is enraged. He kicks using Gear Third; Doflamingo, ever the egoist, believes it is meant for him and dodges. In reality, Luffy intended to kick the ship horizontally, such that it is completely stranded on the delta and cannot exit into the sea. Doflamingo is furious, unsure how _Straw Hat Luffy_ of all people outsmarted him.

Elizobello and Orlumbus, intelligent men by profession, survey Pica atop the land's famously tall cliffs shrugging an onslaught of cannonfire while trying to set his ship aright. Elizobello could punch Pica from this range, but the attack may be too shallow to knock Pica unconscious, and the collateral damage will be immense. Zoro at this time arrives and overhears their converstion. He has a plan: Orlumbus can throw people like a cannonball, yeah?

Zoro is thrown by Orlumbus towards Pica and demonstrates an amazing feat of strength: he trisects Pica until the Donquixote pirate can no longer escape mid-air, before cutting the man himself. Then, Elizobello punches away the debris away from the ship (perhaps incidentally creating a famous landmark as a result).

When Violet blinks, Trebol thinks he finally has the upper hand and makes to strike, only to discover that the Tontattas have pinned him down. Like piranha they pounce on him, making him pay for the friends he has stolen.

The Law - Luffy combination is really damn powerful. Luffy does not have to worry about the drawbacks of his techniques, and Law can bend Luffy's limbs in all sorts of angles. Doflamingo is pummeled. You don't really need Gear Fourth, as a result. However, I will keep it, for two reasons: the first is that it's Oda's idea, and it doesn't hurt to set it up for that really cool battle with Cracker in the Whole Cake Island story; the second is to narrow the focus on Luffy in the story's denouement, as he is our hero after all.

Law comments on how dangerous these techniques are to Luffy, but Luffy is not worried. Then Law is not worried - as his physician, he can only accede to the patient's demands.

Doflamingo has never been so clearly outmatched before. His increased heart rate, his aching limbs, the dull pain in his abdomen reminds him - oh no - of his helplessness when he was a little boy. Luffy lands near Doflamingo, and after a pause he announces: "I don't like you!" It's all well and good to play with people, but Doflamingo doesn't really want to _play_. The reality is, Doflamingo has a double standard with the push coming to shove. "But that's because you've never met anyone equal to you. I'll play with you until you learn some manners!"

Doflamingo can only laugh, laugh so hard until he coughs blood. "Play?!... Yes, 'play'... I love playing with people like they were toy soldiers, play and play until their arms fell off so I could then throw them away... Fine. If you want to be my one true playmate, Straw Hat, then let's play for real." Doflamingo unwinds into string. He then converts the fore of the ship into a massive string puppet, matching Luffy's fist in Gear Third in strength. Yet that puppet too dissolves - transforming into the Bird Cage, surrounding the castle-ship.

Doflamingo is outside the Bird Cage, making a gesture akin to the "middle finger" sign. "I don't feel like playing today, though! Let's make a date some other day!" He then zips away by swinging through the storm clouds.

The pirates mutter how cruel it is that Doflamingo left his "family" on the ship. His family states: We are proud to be sacrifices! That's how children should serve the patriarch! We will meet again in death. Of course, the goons are unhappy. (Perhaps in their heart they believe Doflamingo will break them out of Impel Down.)

The Marines finally arrive. They try to cover Doflamingo's flight path, but if nothing is done soon he will get away, free to terrorize the seas after some years. Luffy yells to Tsuru, his hands gripping on the Bird Cage: Old lady! Ya gotta help us! Tsuru pinches Luffy's cheek, wondering whom he is calling an old lady. He notices his hands bleeding on the cage's edges.

Law states he can swap Luffy with Tsuru, so she would be in the cage and Luffy would be outside. Tsuru likes the idea - she has pursued Doflamingo for so long, she wouldn't mind dying in the cage he has put so many victims in - but she doesn't like the idea of working with pirates. She thinks. "Let's strike a deal, then."

The swap occurs. At this, Law collapses. Luffy is concerned at Law, but Law scoffs at him. "You idiot! What kind of strain did you think you'd put on your own body doing stunts like that, much less someone else's body!" But Law closes his eyes. "Really, I'm just lazy. I'm going to sleep now. I no longer see that face, that I've hated for so long, when I close my eyes. Do you understand what I mean?" Luffy nods, understanding Law trusts him.

Luffy then activates Gear Fourth off-screen, to Law and Tsuru's shock.

Doflamingo is flying away; much to his shock he sees Luffy, in his "balloon" form, flying to him. He tries to swing faster, but at this point his string conducts lightning and he falls onto a Marine galleon. Luffy layers blow upon blow onto him, nearly destroying the ship as a result. Doflamingo converts the ship into a final string clone, wondering how long this form will last. Luffy points something out: Doflamingo isn't laughing anymore. Doflamingo yells "DIE!!!" like a cliched villain, to which Luffy punches him in the face, over and over again, wrecking his famous smile. Doflamingo falls down, finally defeated; the Bird Cage is released. However, Doflamingo's taunt had merit to it: Luffy could not sustain that form and falls into the sea.

When he next awakes, he finds the Marines have taken him to Dressrosa, patching his wounds. Just as he asks for food, Tsuru puts a broom in his hand. "You remember our agreement, don't you? GET TO WORK!" She kicks him off the bed, forcing him to clean up after the collateral damage caused in the past few days.

Kyros re-introduces himself to his father-in-law, apologizing for being such a failure as a son. Predictably, King Riku hugs Kyros. "I have a son!... I have a granddaughter!... I didn't lose everything after all!" Kyros is finally able to hold his daughter.

Sabo has made away with Jesus Burgess and the Flame Fruit, which he has eaten. Though he has acquired two "treasures", he is crestfallen - he would have given everything in the world just to drink wine with Luffy again. Koala makes fun of him, but behind his tears he cries that it was enough just to exchange words with him.

When the kingdom finally celebrates (as they all do), with King Riku reinstated as the kingdom's sovereign, Tsuru receives a call from the Five Elders about the capture of Monkey D. Luffy and Trafalgar D. Water Law; she states that she put them through "hell" and she'll be stopping by Impel Down soon, choosing the most ambiguous message possible. She watches the celebration with Issho.

Tsuru: I actually don't believe what I'm seeing myself. As my nemesis, I believed in Doflamingo's words - I thought he would have lived on forever.

Tsuru: It's a shame we'll have to rattle our sabers at them tomorrow.

Fujitora: What's one more lie?

Tsuru: You removed your sight too soon, Issho.

Fujitora: No... Ridding myself of my sight made me wiser. This laughter is enough.

The pirates of the continent are extremely drunk, sharing in all of the land's wealth. They love peace...peace...peace... but peace is SO BORING!! The blood of these men are hot. They'll have to go to the seas again. And when they do, they'll give the Straw Hats some trouble... But they are our saviors... Then they'll meet again as brothers! They drink from wine cups and swear fealty to the Straw Hat Pirates. "Okay, THAT is a problem. Maybe we should interfere," Tsuru sighs. But Issho has already laughed it off, walking away.

A stranger grabs hold of Luffy's shoulder roughly and drinks wine with him. The Straw Hats are concerned it's an enemy, but Luffy is laughing his hardest. Even if for a short while, he and Sabo can celebrate together.

Akainu, who I don't think is _so_ terrible a person, chews out the Five Elders for giving Doflamingo so many passes for being a _former_ Celestial Dragon. (Akainu is _so_ Type A.) How are my men supposed to work if you keep giving exemptions to these individuals? To which the Five Elders belittle and taunt Sakazuki's actual role in the government: just push pencils, and nothing more. Angry over his lack of control, he berates Fujitora for not bringing in "Straw Hat" Luffy and "Surgeon of Death" Law, knowing damn well when Tsuru is lying after so many years of working with her. "I'm not blind, Issho," being a little insensitive, "I know you're too soft sometimes." The use of Fujitora's informal name leads him to argue, but Akainu will have none of it. "You may only return to base with Straw Hat!"

Issho hangs up on the call, and then in silence laughs. It is an evil, evil laugh. "Oh, I have a way of makin' Straw Hat come 'round."

The Dressrosans inform the Straw Hats that _no_ pirate will be able to reach port after a few days; though they protested loudly, Fujitora could not be dissuaded. They laugh it off, as the admiral is a big softie. Nevertheless, a number of pirate crews disembark immediately.

On the day of departure Issho stands at port. Everyone sees him and waves hi to him, winking. However, they find they cannot take another step. Issho is deadly serious. His gravity is laid so thickly it is nearly like a wall. Luffy, of course, is the first to even attempt to push back this, running through it like it's a mud race. Everyone else follows suit, competing with one another to see who could make it first.

The pirates of the Straw Hat Fleet stand proudly before Fujitora. "Now, let us go Admiral -" Fujitora proudly announces, "You have completed the obstacle course! You are all ready, able-bodied men - and women - of the sea. As far as my eyes see, you are all _Marines_ now." The actual Marines raise a stir, but Fujitora only smiles as the pirates race past them to their ships.

A postscript. Doflamingo is locked in a cell in a prison ship, laughing. Tsuru wonders what he has to laugh about anymore. "You chose him...over me!..." What in heaven's name are you going on about? "The Marines have a lot of people in the underworld in tow today! They can laugh..._today_! But just yesterday, people would have placed their bets on _me_! Why?! Because I was the real one keeping the peace! I was holding the monsters back! Everyone likes to hurt, maim, harm, that is human nature... I just indulge in them! But Straw Hat is going to wake up Kaidou! When he riles that monster, the blood shall be tenfold of this day, and it shall be yours!" He then confides to Tsuru Law's big secret, which he revealed in the throne room: He is also a D. His laughter mixes with the lightning strike. "You're laughing now! I'll be the last one laughing! Hee hee hee!" At this moment, Jack attacks the ship, proving Doflamingo's prediction somewhat to fruition.

<a href="/one-piece-rewrite-wano" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Onward to Wano.</a>

---

I forgot about Kanjuro and Kinemon. To tell the truth, it is very easy for them to meet up while Luffy is fighting in the colosseum. I will not add it to the write-up so that the overall piece has fluidity.

Speaking of forgotten people, Caesar is held in Doflamingo's castle. It is likely Usopp or Robin find him during the raid.

My head canon: only those who exhibit Conqueror's Haki awaken their Devil Fruit abilities. This to me is a satisfying explanation as to how someone "awakens" and why so few people can. The concept is that Conqueror's Haki allows the user to impose their will upon things as a natural-born "king". For those without Devil Fruit abilities, people can project Conqueror's Haki like a weapon. The jailers in Impel Down are fallen kings.

<p id="sugar">
It's amusing that even One Piece Wiki states Sugar's Hobby Woman abilities are multiple, completely unrelated abilities. I think the brief write-up I had above is probably somewhere to being right, considering the Japanese regard for such interests. Basically, a "Hobby Woman" is someone who is "eternally young" through their hobby - it is reminiscient of the quote in II Corinthians: "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things." Based on this, I like the idea that Sugar's "play room" is a lot like Law's "room" - within her room she can make toys and command toys, but once they are outside of the room she pays no attention to them and can no longer control them. People "forget" her toys because they only live in her room of hobbies. She has found several loopholes, making "automatic toys" like wind-up toys, toy trains or kites which move by their own device. She enjoys making "evil" toys too, full of explosives and what not.
</p>

<p id="gladius">
Gladius is a Pop/Puncture Man, depending on which translation you consult. I prefer Pop Man, as it fits my inner canon that the Doflamingo Pirates are somewhat like artists, what with Giolla, Sugar and Doflamingo's abilities. It doesn't make much sense to me that Gladius is able to "pop" other objects; he is also just fine popping himself, a la the Soldier <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h42d0WHRSck" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">rocket-jumping</a> in "Team Fortress 2". Rather than an explosion, he just releases a burst of air, like a balloon popping, which I think is more useful really. Given the strength of his pops, everything on his person becomes weaponized, especially his hair.
</p>

Tsuru figures in this story largely as a plot device. As a Laundry Human, I like the silly idea that she can turn into a laundry machine, "cleaning" pirates en masse, and perhaps being able to dry them as well.
