---
title: 'Rich Men North of Richmond'
slug: 'rich-men-north-of-richmond'
createdAt: '2023-09-25T22:44:08+0000'
seoTitle: "Oliver Anthony's Rich Men North of Richmond"
seoDescription: "Well, let's talk about Oliver Anthony's Rich Men North of Richmond."
tags: ['music']
---

Not to get all political here - as Oliver Anthony asserts his song, "Rich Men North of Richmond", is not - but I don't think the song represents [the resurgence of the "alt-right"](https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/2023/08/17/oliver-anthony-rich-men-north-of-richmond/). (What even is an "alt-right"?) Neither do I think it is [motivation for progressive policies](https://www.bbc.com/culture/article/20230818-rich-men-north-of-richmond-the-hit-song-that-has-divided-the-us).

We often forget that the singer embodies a character; the singer, in effect, is selling a character. I don't buy Cobain's idea that "Rape Me" is an anti-rape song, but I do buy that he depicted an empowered rape victim, if that makes sense. And wouldn't we be sleazeballs if we thought Kurupt truly "passed [the pussy] to the homie, now you hit it / 'cause she ain't nothing but a bitch to me, and ya'll know / the bitches ain't shit to me," and enjoyed the thought? It happens that Anthony is embodying a frustrated young man. Fair enough. John Prine once said George Bush "ain't human" and Kanye said "I guess they want us, [black men], behind bars - I know it." How are you going to judge a song on its message?

You can certainly judge a song by its execution. I assume people dislike Anthony's "over-righteous" tone. But "Alright" is a horrible protest song. I mean, it's Kendrick protesting himself, for whatever reason, so we're protesting, what, ourselves? Is this what is meant by "America Eats Its Young"? (I do like the effect.) Ice Cube is great in his first verse on "Fuck Tha Police", but I think "Cop Killer" is somewhat rude. I never cared for Dylan's "Hurricane". Too long. I would think over-righteousness, if it tinted the voice itself, would be a positive quality. There's genuine agony in Anthony's voice. And I do think "Rich Men" is a cleverly-written song. I mean, title's great. I do like the lines about "I wish politicians would look out for miners / and not minors on an island somewhere"; I do indeed think it's an Epstein reference. And, because people are being really annoying about it, Anthony is likely implying that a politician _could_ get away with pedophilia, not that they _do_, which is of course the _actual_ moral dilemma. (Considering New Jersey's Bob Menendez was [charged with bribery AGAIN](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/indicted-sen-bob-menendez-indicates-not-resigning-rcna117144) and New York's George Santos [still somehow has a job](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/05/nyregion/george-santos-plea-trial.html), he's not wrong.) But ya'll got a problem with Fudge Rounds?

That being said, Anthony probably endeared a lot of people to him because of his hatred for Fudge Rounds. It's a goofy-ass thing to be mad about. Reeks all around of a bad take. I mean, really, what is the connective tissue between Washington and obesity? (OK, I guess you could connect fast food and healthcare lobbyists to undesirable legislation.) But humans are only bad takes. And that's what Anthony is in the song: a human, with some bad takes and some things to say that could be better said. But gosh darn it, he's gonna say it. It's a little like Mick Jagger singing at random about his "dancer friend of mine" to prove that he can't really get his rocks off. Part of what makes the song shine is Anthony's intuitive lyrics, particularly the bit about "living in the new world / with an old soul." As much as I make fun of the Fudge Rounds verse, that rhythm between "five foot three, and three hundred pounds" is commendable.

I couldn't tell you why some songs become more popular than others; for that, you must ask the audience. A singer controls what the song communicates, but the audience gives the song a life outside of music. If you like the song, you probably like the audience; conversely, if you hate the song, you probably hate the audience. And I guess this is where this essay is going towards: I take Anthony at his word, I really do. If you're saying the song is alt-right, you're saying the listeners are alt-right. If you say [the song is lazy](https://www.nationalreview.com/corner/oliver-anthonys-fuzzy-lament/), you're saying the listeners are lazy. In which case, you affirm the thesis of the song: ain't no one cares about the likes of me or the listeners of my song. Which goes to show, you're a hater crying salty hater tears, because you're not cool like me and the listeners of my song. You just don't get it, man. Anthony's real superpower is that he makes all the critique look eyerolling.
