---
title: "Risk of Rain 2 is too long"
slug: "/risk-of-rain-2"
createdAt: "2021-11-08T22:39:21+0000"
seoTitle: "Risk of Rain 2"
seoDescription: "Risk of Rain 2 is too long for an old man like me."
tags: ["video-game"]
---

As a fan of the original "Risk of Rain", "Risk of Rain 2" is too long. The basic concept is there in both games - search through a wasteland while fighting enemies, trigger an event where you're swarmed by a horde of enemies (including boss monsters), survive for the next, harder stage. It's a great concept, but the fundamental difference between both games is that in the original, "survive" means "don't die" - you can run across the whole map to avoid your foes, but at some point you have to eventually defeat them. If you had a good idea of what the layout for a map was and the behavior of certain enemies, you could totally win, albeit by handicapping yourself in the future as monsters get harder over time.

In "Risk of Rain 2", you have to be within a range - a relatively small range - of the teleporter, so to progress in the game you have to be in a narrow area with a powerful boss(es). Most bosses have incredibly strong tools, from the Stone Titan which has incredible range and DPS, to the Wandering Vagrant which has a very strong nova of massive range (easily 2-3 times bigger than the teleporter's range).

This doesn't make the game impossible - in fact, it makes some fights rather exhilarating - but this is added onto the fact that the game _expects_ you to complete 20 stages in a row with moderate difficulty. It's entirely possible, but that's incredibly annoying, especially from a game that vies to be difficult. You're saying that to unlock the Commando's "Frag Grenade" skill, I need to complete 20 stages in a row which may be _2 straight hours_? Uhh, what if I suck at Commando and need to learn how to use him? Too bad, you wasted an hour. What if I make a split-second mistake and get nova'd to death - or, in reality, I don't have 360-degree vision and don't see the monster behind me? or did not get the right defensive/offensive equipment in my run? Too bad, you wasted an hour. What the f?

That's the thing about the game - I completed the 20 stage run with MUL-T feeling incredibly empty. In the original "Risk of Rain", I'd play Huntress for 4 hours feeling elated, having so many upgrades and feeling so powerful. It was volley after volley of missiles and getting huge red health bars defeating so many enemies; most importantly, I could see the carnage happening because I had a third-person view of my character. But in the sequel, after a while, it felt like my success was based on some AoE I couldn't see, and I felt indifferent to the amount of damage and death-defying I was doing. The chaos wasn't fun; it was nauseating, with every part of the screen crammed with blurry pixels obscuring my view.

At the same time, I'm older and can't invest an hour of time to get some fleeting reward. Series like "Metal Slug" and "Mega Man X" play in chunks; you play a chunk, you die a couple of times, you eventually win - within an hour or less, so you get your investment within an hour.

By the way, everything else about the game is meticulously crafted - the balance of the enemies and the characters, the feel of the skills in the game, and the gameplay concept behind each item. On a fundamental level, this game feels like a total time waster, unless it's meant to be either 1) a multiplayer experience specifically or 2) an arcade game, but in either case you usually get something, again, within the first hour of the day you've begun playing.

I dunno, I love the concept of the "Risk of Rain" games, I love the feeling of chaos and exploring vast areas, but the player has to feel powerful _from the get-go_. I enjoyed playing MUL-T in the sequel because he had a good kit _before_ unlocking: he has a good single-target main skill, a good escape skill and a good AoE stun skill, along with decent health scaling. I forgot to mention that during a teleporter event, all chests cannot be unlocked. Since you're incentivized to find the teleporter as quickly as possible, you pretty much cannot pick up any items in the case that you're encountering a particularly hard mob. As a game progresses, players should be encouraged to pick up items. Get rid of "meta" items, like "monsters now drop ammo or treasure" or "falling below in health makes you invisible" or "enemies with 4 or more debuffs take more damage" - these are effects that players don't immediately notice and get in the way of actually fun, visual items. Finally, I've seen the game's AI go HAM on summoning boss-type monsters - 1 hour into the game, whenever I backed up, the game would spawn 4 Beetle Queens in a given area, all of which can do wide burst damage. I recommend boss monsters to be restrained to the initial stage drop and the initial telelporter activation, because bosses are supposed to be special.

Until any significant change is done, I'm just going to delete the game and start something else; I don't want to risk starting up the game, marveling at the feel of each character, then getting blue as the more effort I put in the game feels more and more pointless.