---
title: "There's a masterpiece somewhere in Spielberg's Lincoln"
slug: "/steven-spielberg-lincoln-film"
createdAt: "2021-03-31T18:28:26+0000"
seoTitle: "There's a masterpiece somewhere in Spielberg's Lincoln"
seoDescription: "We analyze Steven Spielberg's Lincoln."
tags: ["film"]
---

In the final arc of Steven Spielberg's "Lincoln", Lincoln threatens the uneasy advisors of the drafted Thirteenth Amendment: "I can't accomplish a goddamn thing of any human meaning or worth until we cure ourselves of slavery and end this pestilential war, and whether any of you or anyone else knows it, I know I need this!" Lincoln, as performed by Daniel Day-Lewis, throughout the film speaks lightly, even softly; he does not express personal opinion or emotions all too much. In the aforementioned scene he reveals the arc of his character: a deep personal need for order and unity among the Northern States, and even more with the Southern States, rather than a moral need for slavery to be abolished.

I'm conflicted most about the complex nature of Lincoln's character versus the complexity of the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment; Lincoln's character is somewhat lost in the politics of it all. By far, Lincoln is the most interesting character or thing in the whole film - around him the other characters revolve, around him the various strong and meek personalities dance and only edge to his conviction, though, by his nature, or by his intention, he is reserved. The ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment is interesting, but the film will ultimately never cover it in the amount of detail it deserves. Fair enough; much ink has already been spilled on the topic. If this is the case, then perhaps the film should not have controlled the depiction of Lincoln's character through the Thirteenth Amendment, and the surrounding historical events, itself - Lincoln is tied inextricably to overtures of peace and abolition, but that does not make a nuanced character necessarily.

That's the central issue I have, on reflection, with the film: the most impressive thing about Spielberg's "Lincoln" is that it actually, genuinely heroizes Abraham Lincolm, and yet on second contemplation Lincoln does not arise from the film's specific moment. Lincoln of course is beloved by current American culture, but the love of art is not the same as the love of a person. The love art requires is a deep, subtle and complex love that covers the subject thoroughly, even picking up its flaws and laughing at its pains when the time arises. Such is the case for Stendhal's Julian Sorel of "The Red and the Black"; even if Stendhal has high contempt for this character, the devotion he put behind rendering the character and giving him reality is an act of love, and for that reason Sorel arises in our mind as a "hero" of a kind, a personality identified solely with his struggle. Lincoln, in that sense, has never been a "hero", not in the way George Washington has. This film felt very close to reaching there, capturing the essence of his character and tying his personal stake to the mortal drama, that being his personal need for peace and unity, and his genuine belief in kindness and gentleness. However, when one turns one's mind over the film, the film's most impactful moments come from his reacting to the war and the question of slavery - for that reason, it's hard to pull apart the Abraham Lincoln as defined by his speeches and the Abraham Lincoln as defined by an eternal character.

All of the artistry is there: Spielberg, known for dramatic, possibly saccharide, films, does a great-good job of directing. In Lincoln's first scene, his face is mostly concealed, as if Spielberg understood the immense task of depicting a person whose character has already been written and rewritten constantly by his audience. In what could be seen as the final scene of the film, before a sort of epilogue commences, Lincoln is facing a window, over which a gauze filters the light; Lincoln, head down and half-concealed by shadows, suddenly hears cannonade fired in the distance, followed by the bells of victory celebrating the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment. The moment is perfectly rendered: Lincoln dwelling in the darkness of his soul, in the gentle manner attributed to him throughout the film, shrunken by the furniture and decoration of the room that are ignorant of the mortal drama surrounding it. There are some moments where Lincoln's theme inappropriately intrudes, reminding you, yes, this is Abraham Lincoln and he's a great guy. I don't think these musical stings ruin the film, but the film is best when it is subtle, and Lincoln is not understood to be the hero of the film.

Perhaps I expect too much from the film, though this is largely because I enjoyed it so much. I would have liked the film to be what the "Aeneid" did for the Roman hero Aeneas, or what "Julius Caesar" had done for the real-life figures of Brutus and Cassius Dio. Instead, it's simply a very good film, whose high mark is Daniel Day-Lewis's acting as Lincoln. That is good enough.