---
title: "The Narrative of Fucking"
slug: "/the-narrative-of-fucking"
createdAt: "2021-07-25T00:17:20+00:00"
seoTitle: "The Narrative of Fucking"
seoDescription: "The Weebforce discuss how recently the storytelling of pornography and anime have blended in disturbing ways, through the show Nagotoro."
tags: ["animation", "anime"]
---

Lately I've been obsessed with the value of art; in my current state of mind it boils down to this: the objective value of art, in an economic or other sense, comes from its ability to demonstrate ideas to people. I use this language carefully, because art doesn't convince people those ideas are _true_, it only demonstrates that the ideas - connections, analogies, concepts - are _plausible_.

On a basic level art is a manipulation of reality. I covered an example of this in <a href="https://www.weebforce.com/video-games-are-not-art" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">this article</a> - Kay Jewelers ran a commercial linking profound human desires, such as love, self-fulfillment, the meaning of life, to jewelry. Is that true? No, absolutely not, but it's _plausible_ if the man and woman have a perfect relationship and they always love each other regardless of any struggle and they end up having the perfect family and perfect progression of life. Obviously most people find that incredibly hard to believe, but the commercial only really needs to affect you once to sell some units. I mean, it played hundreds of times a day, you're gonna get tricked one of those times.

This is no more apparent in the storytelling of pornography, which is very carefully constructed to play on people's _temporary_ emotions. Obviously, no person empathizes with the man with the 10-inch penis fucking a blonde woman 24 hours, 7 days a week. (Ok, some people. Ok, more men than I'd like to admit.) But bizarrely enough, I've been noticing how some forms of popular fiction - especially anime - have an inextricable link to pornography by the way of their narrative.

### Don't Toy With Me, Miss Nagotoro

I've been watching "Nagotoro" recently. Not because I want to. I have a partner in anime - who I guess is also my partner in crime, given what "Nagotoro" is - who, I think to piss me off, always wants to watch it. So I've gotten quite familiar with the show.

The author of "Nagotoro", surprise surprise, is also the author of many hentai/doujinishi. (For those not in the know, "hentai" is basically Japanese cartoon pornography - in the language, it actually refers to bizarre acts of sexual perversion - and "doujinishi" are non-canonical, fan-made works of popular series; here I use it to refer to explicitly sexual fan works.) This becomes rather clear after watching the show.

The story of "Nagotoro" can be whittled down to, "Some poor highschool guy is tortured by some highschool girl through severe sexual frustration." Admittedly the show is funny and sometimes sets situations up properly, but I can't imagine anyone liking the show and ignoring how blatant the premise is.

"Nagotoro" really blurs that line between what we call "fiction" and "pornography", to the point that, in a certain sense, pornography is romantic fiction and vice versa (except for fetish porn, I think). Usually we say what distinguishes fiction from porn are: characters, story, setting. Porn doesn't really have any of these because it has to focus on the fucking. But in our bizarre postmodern world, these elements keep getting thrown away. In Christopher Nolan's "Tenet", the protagonist doesn't even have a name; realistic fiction and reality TV shows have given up on the concept of a story; and Darren Aronofsky's "The Fountain" took place in...someone's imagination?

"Nagotoro" shaves off almost all attributes of a story, which is not anything new for an anime (because they're all shit), but you surprisingly cannot tell whether it's going to be a hentai or a normal comedy. I've forgotten the main character's name, so I'm going to call him "Guy"; Nagotoro and guy have no distinguishing or grounded personality; they're in high school, that's about it; they screw around all day. Every day they're in some situation where Nagotoro taunts the main character about his sexuality although she is secretly super into the guy. She finds all kinds of ways to flaunt her body (her UNDERAGED body, by the way!) in front of him. If one watches porn, one would think "...and cue the fucking!" But no, what usually happens is that she either totally embarrasses herself, revealing too much at the end, or the guy does some, I guess, surprisingly tender gesture.

### The Narrative of Porn

You may be thinking, Well that sounds perfectly fine, the show is stupid but there's nothing _explicitly_ sexual about it. Wait a bit - let me talk about the narrative of porn first before I connect the two together.

If one really thinks about it, the typical narrative of a "Nagotoro" vignette is not that different from a scene in porn. Boiling it down, if you take the male porn star as the protagonist, then the plot is really their journey of dominating their partner i.e. an attractive female.

Women in all fiction - and men in female-written fiction, though significant differences exist - represent the unknown, the "mysterious gender". Circe represents this to Odyssesus in the "Odyssey", and this entire theme is tackled in the Wife of Bath's tale in Chaucer's "Canterbury Tales". Gender is still a rather mysterious thing to us in our modern time; the witches of old have become the femme fatales of modern day.

"Nagotoro" on the surface can be called a story about a boy learning about his attraction to women, but the shallowness of the characters almost disproves this. Instead, I think the story is really about a boy asserting his dominance over an energetic, somewhat vain highschool girl. This is supported by the set up of the story - Nagotoro beats the guy in everything, from sports to arguments. Then the guy has a role-reversal with Nagotoro, where he either equals her in power in the relationship or he is in a position of greater power, but submits it lovingly to her. This is evident in the situations where he sees Nagotoro bathing, he accidentally gropes her thighs while carrying her piggy-back style, and he shows his collection of hentai to her friends so that she can win an argument.

This relationship of power, constantly fluctuating between a man and a woman, is what draws people to "Nagotoro", presumably. It's an inherently erotic relationship where the man or the woman get to impose their secret fantasy on the other - just like when the guy gets Nagotoro to dress up in a cat outfit or Nagotoro gets the guy all alone in a certain situation.

This is further supported by the fact that narratively the guy and Nagotoro are inseparable...because. The guy really does not have any other friends and Nagotoro has an unexplainable attraction to him. This is, again, a similar set-up in porn, where the man's partner is his girlfriend or his mother or his stepsister - someone the man _has_ to live with.

Even more support for the argument is the sexual rivalry that comes from Nagotoro's friends, who enjoy teasing the guy as much as Nagotoro does. This is the same paradigm in porn found in cheating or cuckold porn - the protagonist sexually defeats their rival, though in this case it's Nagotoro who has to prove herself to the protagonist.

### ...And In All Fiction

It's easy to make fun of "Nagotoro" for its blatant manipulation of pornographic tropes to entice its audience, but at least it's honest; almost _all_ anime does this. "Re:Zero", "Love is War", "Horimiya", whether it's a comedy, drama or action series, there's always some element of a character needing to sexually prove themselves in order to dominate their partner in an overt or unspoken relationship, which leads one to think, quite rightly, that these shows are for _teenagers_.

But this type of dynamic, that of the all-powerful conquering hero and his reward, is an element of many fiction, so much so that people write fanfiction elevating this dynamic to fantastic heights. You can observe this in the film "Hobbes & Shaw" even, and it certainly thrives in stupid sitcoms like "Two and a Half Men" and "The Big Bang Theory". Hell, it even sneaks into critically-acclaimed films like "The Shape of Water" and the anime film "Your Name".

This phenomenon really only exists where characterization has been blunted to the dullest edge. When you have two characters on the screen who are sexually attractive to the audience and there is not much more to their presence in terms of their character or to the story, one fills in the blanks of their relationship with the most basic human desire: that of want and lust. When characters are not perceived to have varying, valued goals in a work of fiction, then their romantic goals can be whittled down to "They want to fuck each other."

And it can't be understated how much the audience _wants_ that. I think - and maybe I'm crazy - audience members want to see a romantic relationship that is boiled down to simple factors like sexual attractiveness and intrigue, which are quantifiable and more salient compared to more complex factors such as the want to create a lasting relationship with someone. For single people, they would want to find someone based on simple criteria; for couples, they would want to know if they are sticking with someone based on simple criteria. In short, the word "romance" already overly simplifies what two people do in a relationship; the word "romance" conveys heat and energy where most relationships cannot be characterized by these types of feelings.

### Philosophy of Porn

This is the brilliance ("brilliance" in seven quotation marks) of porn - it does not just satisfy people's lusts, it also provides them a philosophy on sex. A good number of people find videos of people simply having sex boring. Porn instead has broken down the genre into several tropes, all of them acting as signs, having value in themselves, towards the ultimate goal: orgasm (or, physical happiness). Particular close-ups of the bust and ass, the particular style of intercourse, the particular progression of foreplay and the sexual act, these are details for people to fixate upon and denote when someone has reached a particular stage in fulfillment, much like the use of Pavlov's bell in his experiments with dogs. Furthermore, directors convince you that these details have value not just for you, but also for the _partner_, such that pornography is seen as having a generous spirit (a true laugh-out-loud idea, but that they try, is true nonetheless). These rituals are also reinforced in the audience's brain because of their complexity and length, which can also be observed in many behavior experiments on learning; each stage of the ritual acts as a reinforcing agent, consequently. Thus it's slightly comical when people praise or condemn porn for its morality - they do not observe it's this _ritual_ that characterizes porn, rather than the individual elements themselves, and really you can place any type of morality on a ritual (a complex set of human instructions).

The ritual, because it is thought to represent ideas of sexual empowerment and liberation, has the value, more than the individual acts - cunnilingus, penetration, cum shot, these are no different than the rhythms of a mediocre story. In the example of a series like "Wonder Egg Priority", the ritual is that the character suffers, weeps a little bit, does daily life stuff, then beats up a bad guy, therefore validating the value of life. This is all bullshit of course, but since the ritual has all the meaning, they can get away with all sorts of things like <a href="https://weebforce.com/wonder-egg-priority-is-the-most-offensive-anime" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">sexualizing and abusing children</a>. In fact, these specific details, irrelevant to the plot, characters and setting of the story, can be valued (fetishized) in of themselves, much like squirting and pearl necklaces in pornography.

It is much easier to make people believe in the ritual, the pattern, the trope than believe in anything new. The ritual has been designed to entice and tantalize various parts of a person, then to subtly introduce them to new concepts - in short, the ritual is designed to be viral. No different than religion, no different than a cult, pornography relies on patterns to create converts - and so anime does too.
