---
title: 'The Wind Rises'
slug: '/hayao-miyazaki-the-wind-rises'
createdAt: '2023-11-27T02:25:41+0000'
seoTitle: "The Wind Rises"
seoDescription: "Let's discuss Hayao Miyazaki's The Wind Rises, one of his masterpieces."
tags: ['anime', 'animation', 'film']
---

Thanks for not fucking telling me your new film was going to be released, Miyazaki.

Boy oh boy I had a plan. Before "The Boy and the Heron" (used to be "How Do You Live?", named after the 1937 novel) I was planning on publishing an article about "The Wind Rises", what I consider to be Miyazaki's greatest work. Yet, as was decided by Ghibli's producer, Toshio Suzuki, there was no fanfare for the film. Probably because the film was a real film and press would only cheapen it.

So then, what is there left to do, but to...simply write about "The Wind Rises", for the pleasure of simply writing about it?

Let's just charge out of the gate. I'll be straight. "The Wind Rises", in my view, is Miyazaki's greatest film. Well, that's a complicated claim. There are only three "perfect" films: "My Neighbor Totoro", "Spirited Away", and today's subject. (Edit: And "The Boy And The Heron". Well, let's give it a few years.) Each film accompanied a complete change in his career. "Totoro" moved away from his clear genre fiction inspirations and towards his examination of the human condition. For all the blood in "Princess Mononoke", it's only for show, and not felt; "Spirited Away" was, and may still be, his darkest film. What followed were rather cynical films. "The Wind Rises" is little cynical. Besides "Porco Rosso", it is the sole film that lives (largely) in reality. Perhaps, in grounding his work finally on _terra firma_, he had hoped to make Capital-A Art.

This is a problematic assessment on its face, surely. To call the shadow-drenched, lantern-soaked "Spirited Away" anything less than art is, well, not to be so overzealous and dramatic, simply incorrect. But on the other hand, "Spirited Away", beyond its Freudian interpretation, does not lend much to philosophy or ideas. Perhaps this is all overrated. Perhaps. But I do think one of the requirements of art is that it reveals the person beneath it. Look no further than the works of Roald Dahl or Maurice Sendak. Clearly, even if made for children, art demands idiosyncrasy.

But that may be too strong a requirement from our individualistic Western culture, that of the need for originality and difference, sometimes at the expense of form. You can say many things about Hayao Miyazaki: he's surely an opinionated person, but he's not prone to opening his mouth for no reason other than he can. His silence is a choice. You can read anti-war themes in "Howl's Moving Castle" and "Ponyo", but they never call out explicitly any war.

Which is problematic. We seem to be seesawing back and forth on this man who embraces contradiction. By not calling attention to war, and its motivations and its actors, and merely painting a broad brush of "it's bad", he doesn't arrive at anything particular, anything worthy of inspection. Again: lacking in philosophy and ideas.

"The Wind Rises" is clearly his most opinionated work (edit: after "The Boy And The Heron"). Newspapers were upset it depicted little of the excesses of Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany. They didn't understand. The opinion that the use of power, over those who have no power, is wrong, is an obvious one. He had been presenting it for the entirety of his career. They weren't paying attention.

The film is his most nationalistic one. Beyond taking place literally in his country of birth, it's an examination of where Japan had been in the world and where it is now. It begins with that breathtaking scene of our hero, Jiro, taking flight over the pre-modernized countryside, soaring over rice paddies, wooden bridges and rivers. Miyazaki reiterates these images upon Jiro waking up, shuffling through the daytime of his routines. Contrast this with the later scene where Jiro first meets Caproni, an Italian inventor of planes. When he first beholds Caproni's invention, it menaces with steel and black machine guns. At the end of the scene, he is with the eccentric engineer on top of the plane, looking below at rustic Italian houses and the grassy hills they neighbor. When Jiro dreams further on, his plane, which originally was nondescript, is built out of steel. The implication is clear. Jiro has his own ideals of beauty, inspired from his own Japanese upbringing, but, as he grows older and acquires nuance, he incorporates Caproni's ideal of beauty with his own. This is more than Miyazaki's duties of building the character - he is also depicting the development of Japanese society and the beauty of Western ideals. Do not doubt it - when Jiro first meets Nahoko, they quote Paul Valery's "The Graveyard By The Sea".

I bet some conservatives fucking _hated_ him for suggesting this.

Miyazaki also paints the pain that the Japanese felt as they were modernizing. When Jiro unveils his first plane, it is pulled by oxen. (This scene is reprised at the very end of the film. It's hard to know if this is more Miyazaki's cynicism: that Japan had built fearsome weapons, but is still employing animal labor, almost as if unable to shed its robes as an undeveloped nation.) Jiro later in the film remarks, surveying with awe Junkers' plane, that the Germans do not transport their planes with animals. These same Germans, at the forefront of technology, deny Jiro his right to study Junkers' plane, humiliating him, calling out his ethnicity, and forcing him to speak in German. For the Japaneses' part, his bosses are in childish awe as they fly in the plane, on the permission of Junkers himself, almost proving the Germans' suspicions of them. But Miyazaki doesn't take the insult personally on behalf of his skin color; he takes offense on an intellectual level. Knowledge and beauty are not things to be hoarded. By their very nature they should be shared.

It's clear that Miyazaki felt the Mitsubishi A5M Zero is an intellectual and aesthetic accomplishment of the Japanese, a cultural achievement over a martial one. Jiro examining the fish bone is all you need to know: this island of fishermen produced a plane of such astounding speed, its beauty coming from the design that allows its wind-warping flight. It's not a product of overwhelming genius; it came from hard work and the fruits of Jiro's living. It was born in the womb of Japanese soil. This is why he has such immense pride for it. Where Japan was once so backwards, it had the temporary brilliance in one of its people to create something so free, so future-looking, so profound in its implication for man's creative impulse. Japan could now stand proud with other modern countries, especially after the suffering caused by the Great Kantō earthquake. Again, to those who decried that Miyazaki didn't devote much attention to Japan's atrocities...

...actually, let me pick apart that claim, because it's incredibly wrong. If you want to know his position on the Japanese navy, look no further than the scene where Jiro proposes his plane's design. The naval officers are mongoloid, endlessly screaming, puffing their chests and yelling like animals. At this point, Jiro had been ripped from his wife as a result of the government's spying. And, boy oh boy, does Miyazaki hate Nazis. Hans Castorp, the magical visitor of Karuizawa, explicitly says the Nazis will destroy themselves. I don't know what people want from Miyazaki: they're not important to the film. At all. He actually addresses them more than he needs to. How many ways can he say "Killing people is bad?"

Again, and again, to those who decried that Miyazaki didn't devote much attention to Japan's atrocities, I would forward the argument that "that is what losers think." Beauty doesn't need to defend itself; it is. We can look at the Zero in isolation as describing the potential of humankind. And even if you disagree, you know this is the artist's position, as Caproni muses that he would rather live in a world of pyramids, those same whose creation depended on bloodshed, misery and slavery.

What a shame, then, the film is so boring.

I say this in jest, but having seen the film three times now I remarked how glacial it occasionally is. And I love slow movies. But I've observed this so consistently that I can't ignore it. I always thought, "The beginning is the slow part." The beginning, of Jiro's childhood, the earthquake, the fire, up to the point he goes to Germany, is not isolated from the rest of the film. You also have to endure his courtship with Nahoko and an action scene where he runs to catch a bus. A real true blue film has something of the human in it, even when we know what will happen. The human expression is profound in how much information it conveys. There is something to watching a film where our bodies are compressed into form. This is the weakness of animation: a drawing only exists for the artist, and nothing more. It doesn't extend to the audience. Gestures are not incidental nor surprising; if we find in them something absurd, we can hand-wave them away, as the artist's delusion. And so the same is said for light and motion, key aspects of our experience. We may read whatever we wish from animation, but it doesn't add to our reality. It doesn't help that the film's dialogue is wooden.

Now we arrive at the uncomfortable topic.

When I first saw the film in the spring of 2014, I cried. A decade divorced from this incident, I raised an eyebrow. Specifically, I cried at the ending, as Jiro's dream was coming to an end. The resolution of Nahoko's character got to me. But Nahoko, as I've thought about carefully over the years, is one of the worst female characters ever written. No one reads my blog, so I can't be accused of being "woke"; I don't advantage from it. She immediately falls in love with Jiro, she always wants to be by Jiro's side, and ultimately she leaves him because she "wants him to remember her as she was" or some garbage like that. She really has no agency, no opinion of her own. I felt a little embarassed that I, even as a teenager, fell for the narrative of the "absolutely adoring and self-sacrificing wife".

If ever there was a correct critique of Miyazaki's oeuvre, it would be that his films resolve heavily around a male-centric view, which I don't begrudge him for. Though more of his films have female leads than not, all of his women are ideal women, from Nausicaa to Sheeta to Kiki to San to Chihiro to Sophie. They represent the creative, female aspect, who either restore the earth to its original balance or take vengeance against the earth's antagonists. In contrast, the few men he does depict, as Pazu, Porco Rosso, Howl and Jiro of "The Wind Rises", are pragmatic and resigned to violence. To overidealize is to not at all flatter real-life women, and there are no particular traits to any of them, except, perhaps, the overly fastidious Sophie. His films have always had this duality: men aspire to closeminded, narrow, overly-defined goals, while women point out and fix the flaws of the designs of men.

But "The Wind Rises" is about a character, Jiro Horikoshi, based on the real life Jiro, as well as Tatsuo Hori's life as depicted in his semi-autobiographical "The Wind Has Risen" (1938). This is where the film falls flat. The real life Jiro is, of course, a real man. Tatsuo Hori, in the style of the time, not just of Japanese writers but their inspirations, such as Dostoevsky and Balzac, was a psychologist. Miyazaki is not the latter and he does not write the former. For anyone expecting more from this spinner of fairy tales, they will be sorely disappointed.

And that is Miyazaki's last trick: the film is not at all about reality. Far from it. It is about dreams. He has magnanimously brought his own dreams into our world, blessing it forever.

One could say all of Miyazaki's films operate under a context: it operates partially under our context, but it comes largely from his masterful touch. _We_ come into the films expecting a lot of fiction. Fair enough. We are rightful to. But we do so on Miyazaki's terms. We are Pavlovian: give us bright color and plenty of movement, and we assume we are in a fantasy, a place in sharp contrast to the dullness of our lives. He has never resorted to those tricks. "Spirited Away" begins with a slow car ride. I believe "Ponyo" begins with a title card sequence. That momentum is how he gets to us: we know we are in a different world because it's the world that Miyazaki happens to love. He devotes time to rendering the swaying of a tree, or the texture of a glove. That _is_ the substance. The is-ness of the world is Miyazaki's business. In the hands of any other, it is embellishment. In the hands of any other, it is showy and pretentious.

It's not an artform of how many moving models can be put on screen. It's an artform, period. He knows what he's doing by beginning the film with that sequence of flight. Miyazaki's love for the Earth is not trivial, it is inspired by Shinto, Buddhism and Taoism; it comes from a place of believing that Earth has a soul, feels and itself is an actor that is not meant to be exploited. He does not paint the countryside because he can; he paints it because he wants the viewer to believe that our soul and our notion of beauty comes from the Earth.

The film from start to finish is a fantasy, and Jiro's waking up does not change this. We're fooled because he makes references to real-life things in it, though no one complains that Tolkien's Middle-Earth has, well, the word "Earth" in it, or that it has kingdoms, swords, et cetera. Looking at the film, there's no way anyone could argue it was real, Nahoko and their romance being the most glaring departure. The earthquake swells beneath Tokyo like a muscle. The shadows of the Nazis dance and fade like fairies into alleyways. Never mind Caproni, Hans Castorp revealed himself to me as another magical guide in this recent revisit, urging Nahoko and Jiro together. He only eats watercress, and his nose is as long as Yubaba's. And, he has the seeming ability to disappear into thin air.

If it's anyone's dream, it's Miyazaki's: it's his dream of a decent, beautiful world. It is, first and foremost, of his dream of an artist called Jiro, and it is secondarily a vision of what an older Japan may have looked like if its violence were backgrounded (much like a dream, however, it threatens to invade constantly).

And in that same sense, it is also a film about transience. Much like a dream, the reality of the world threatens to invade constantly. I've been puzzled a lot by Caproni's idea that an artist only has ten good years - this is obviously far from true for Miyazaki himself. What he really meant, as I discovered in the rewatch, is that good things seldom last so long. Jiro is torn away from his work when his first plane is first flown. The moment Jiro proposes to Nahoko, he is taken away from her. Then, of course, there is the ending, where Jiro laments the death his Zero has caused. All of this is foreshadowed by that opening scene, where goons - that's right, real crooks - destroy Jiro's imaginary plane, thus ending the dream. Life is a succession of dreams, where one dream ending the next immediately starts up. Indeed, at the critical points where Jiro doubts his dreams, Caproni incidentally appears to remind him how crucial they are to his very being.

Yet the ending's the rub. The dream is over, and Jiro must live through the apocalypse caused by planes endlessly crashing into the ground, spraying the Earth with iron and poison. What is left is Miyazaki's final dream. The film's end, where Nahoko enjoins Jiro to live, is a message not for him but for us and Miyazaki. The pain and suffering are long past, we are here and we must live instead. We continue, in spite of everything. Nothing is set in stone and we are free, at the end of the frame, to dream on. This is Miyazaki at his most optimistic. He silently says Shakespeare's last words, through the lips of Prospero: "Gentle breath of yours my sails / Must fill, or else my project fails, / Which was to please."

So I wasn't wrong to cry at the end of the film; I was not crying over Nahoko, nor the death of the dream of domesticity, I was crying over the film's sense of freedom. We are free to feel pain and we are free to have happiness. Our dreams are not delusions, as some would have us believe (as I would have you believe, occasionally), but are our saving graces. This is the film that makes all his other films sweeter, this is the film that sheds a light on his oeuvre, because it most argues the necessity of child-like optimism and the fight against despair. I watch it over and over again because it genuinely gives me hope for humanity. It's his greatest film; get to it, I need say no more. We should all dream as Miyazaki dreams.

### Death of the Dream

And now having said all of this I can indulge a little in my own feelings and say it is a fucking shame that the world cares so little for his dream.

I constantly cite Miyazaki's reasoning for 2023's "The Boy And The Heron", which I think is a fiction from me, surely I can't find its source anymore; I tell it as, in his words, "I saw my grandson watching _anime_ and I couldn't let that be my fucking legacy." I'm certain now I made it up, but I love to think he did indeed say that.

In the very same year as the release of "The Boy And The Heron", Ghibli became a subsidiary of Nippon Television Holdings, Inc., which, going by my cursory research, is like, say, the CBS of Japan. Miyazaki, finally, has become Honorary Chairman, which sounds like a largely ceremonial role. Toshio Suzuki, long Ghibili's producer, is out.

In a way, though, Ghibli had long been dead since the twin triumph of 2013's "The Wind Rises" and Isao Takahata's "The Tale of the Princess Kaguya" (which I may actually like more than the former), with only three films made since, including Goro Miyazaki's rather lackluster "Earwig and the Witch". The issue is that, I think, Takahata and Miyazaki's films set standards too high; directors could only emulate the _idea_ of a Ghibli film, rather than the craftmanship behind them. "Earwig and the Witch" is a great example of being a Ghibli film _by premise_; same for "Arrietty"; meanwhile, for work outside of Ghibli, literally all of director Mamoru Hosoda's work is a low-rent rip-off of Ghibli's. Another possible issue is that Ghibli has an "all-ages" demographic. I like to imagine a world where "Ocean Waves" (1993), which I think is a fine film, explores its darker themes more, leaving the fantasy behind.

But the appeal of Ghibli comes precisely from the fact that its films are age-less: they appeal to the spirit, rather than the audience's indulgences. The nudity and violence of "Akira" gates it. Same for "Evangelion". None of Ghibli's films have that juvenile fascination with violence, except, I say as a joke, the fist fight at the end of "Porco Rosso". But that's the only appetite the audience, seemingly, has.

I'll also add that the violence is typically never _stylized_ enough. The violence in "Akira" has an intent behind it, to the extent the audience becomes nauseous, as I do every time I watch the film, almost religiously. I'm no prude: I like violence, but it should achieve some aesthetic aim a la Tarantino. Nowadays, violence exists for violence; like a bullfighter baiting a bull, we cheer whenever someone punches someone else in the face. We aren't even impressed by the fighter's bravery because, after all, he, or she, is a cartoon.

I don't think Miyazaki himself is against violence, as he has admitted he is a bit of a sci-fi nerd; he probably would have made more science fiction films had he not met Takahata. It's the pointlessness, the animal rutting, that disappoints him.

We live in the worst of times. In my book, Ghibli just died. It was the last studio that really had artistic integrity. I mean, we'll see what Anno's Studio Khara will do, but I doubt anything good will come of it. (In my opinion, only bad has come out of it so far, EXCEPT "The Dragon Dentist" film.) There's something really defective with _anime_. When Miyazaki and Takahata retired, a hundred artists should have stood up to take their place: Hideaki Anno (well, not really, Anno is all over the map), Shinichiro Watanabe, Naoko Yamada, Kunihiko Ikuhara, Hiroyuki Imaishi, Masaaki Yuasa. All of them have. Failed. Me. Completely. It was a misery we lost Satoshi Kon in his fight against cancer. Katsuhiro Otomo was getting into his retirement age, so I can't blame him.

But wow, Miyazaki's legacy is a lot of cynical art. Not "cynical cash-grabs", but films cynical about their own existence and their audience. I know Anno wanted to revitalize anime with Khara, but he simply made more "Evangelion" films. Watanabe is style over substance. Yamada is addicted to lens flares. Ikuhara overwrites and overexplains. Imaishi only wants blood spatters. And Yuasa's appeal is in how smug he is. There's something about Generation X where they don't give a shit about making art anymore.

And somewhere in all of this we lost Kazuya Tsurumaki ("FLCL", "Dragon Dentist"), Ikuko Itoh ("Princess Tutu"), Shuko Murase ("Ergo Proxy")...countless other names who have made invigorating work but have not followed up, and disappeared into the recesses of history. This is a miserable situation. The veterans should be leading newer generations with their _magna opera_; we should recognize newer artists at this point in time, making their own mark in the field. But we don't. Anime directors are dime-a-dozen. They seem to constantly change and warp from production to production. This is even the case for Wit Studio, which has made some pretty out-there work ("Rolling Girls", "After The Rain", "Vivy", no credit given to Tappei Nagatsuki, of course). (The only exception to the rule I can think of now is Naokatsu Tsuda, who has given a consistent, energetic feel to the "JoJo's Bizarre Adventure" adaptations.)

I dislike being so negative, but you can't imagine how depressed I felt after learning about Ghibli's management change. I'm past the point of thinking this is hyperbole. This is the death of something. Usually at this point, contrarian ever I am, I say, "Death means birth of something new," but I haven't identified any birth, unless it's entirely local to Japan (which would be a welcomed and extremely exciting change, as we haven't really talked about how the globalization of anime somewhat ruined it). And even then, work keeps getting made, so at any point in time it can come back to life. But I think anime is really dead. I think all that animates its corpse are tropes and audience expectations. All the blood, sweat and tears were really for nothing. I'm glad that Miyazaki's last work is so great as to illumine over this vast, profound darkness.
