---
title: "Tracy Chapman's Fast Car"
slug: 'tracy-chapman-fast-car'
createdAt: '2024-03-31T02:26:09+0000'
seoTitle: "Tracy Chapman's Fast Car"
seoDescription: "For 2024, I'll talk about a song a day: this week, we'll talk about Tracy Chapman's Fast Car."
tags: ['music', 'song of the week']
rating: 4
---

I've given myself the task of writing about one song a week for 2024 because, well, I think it'd be fun.

If you too had noticed it, no, it was a coincidence that most entries for Women's History Month (mostly) concerned female artists.

### Tracy Chapman's Fast Car

<iframe width="560" height="315" style="margin-bottom: 1em" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AIOAlaACuv4?si=vawL2MQ5zqzma5JU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zEqb6xbeuCo?si=3DYO51JBbUsgFwk6" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Happy birthday Tracy, because you're totally reading this.

I'm suspicious of youth, in a musical culture that is ever eager to push out new faces (which is an overall good). Small and almost tangential anecdote: I wanted to remember what my "albums of 1992" list was, and so did some digging. Publications proposed as best: Dr. Dre's "Chronic", Pavement's "Slanted and Enchanted", Beasties Boys' "Check Your Head", Alice in Chains' "Dirt", etc. Not Annie Lennox's "Diva" (which I have to mull over), not Leonard Cohen's "The Future", which I think is an exceptional album in his discography.

I don't even find youth more emotional in their approach, as is revealed by the entries in this blog; I simply think their naivete appeals to some American idealism, which I find acceptable, but also somewhat mean for older artists who will make career-defining work later in life (I'm looking at you, snubbers of ANOHNI and Jaimie Branch last year). The music is by no measure "better" (as in, danceable) and it more often than not lacks in intellectual quality, or depth. Sometimes you find a really charismatic artist from the pack, but you find they need polish.

But, at the age of 24, when her debut album "Tracy Chapman" came out, Chapman had everything. I shouldn't have doubted her. At that age, she added to the canon of American music. To me she's right up there with Iggy Pop for blinding, inimitable brilliance, which is a funny comparison on first thought but, on the second, you know how serious I am.

Let's take a brief look at "Talkin' Bout a Revolution", which [Christgau disdained](https://robertchristgau.com/xg/cg/cgv588-88.php). His politics align a bit with mine i.e. politics tend to poison music, as in, they make it boring. But look no further than the first verse for Chapman's majestic sweep: "They're standing in the welfare lines, / crying at the doorsteps at the armies of salvation, / wasting time, in the unemployment lines, / sitting around, waiting for a promotion." Ahhh, I do love me commas, and I do love her ability to slowly and gently pan from our characters as they journey from shelter to shelter. Then there's the emotional "run, run, run" lyric towards the end of the song, sung with such conviction you see the glory she's envisioning.

Generally I'm with Christgau on this one - I don't know why we agree on so much, when we don't agree on Elvis Costello - as most of the songs on "Tracy Chapman" are rhetorical and not fiction. I actually disagree with him on "Mountains O' Things", as, whether Tracy is herself singing or singing through the lens of a character, the character is quite boring.

The best songs in the album possess that storytelling ability, that power to follow her train of thought, as in the album's third single, "Baby Can I Hold You". Again, it doesn't matter _who_ sings the song, the singer or a fictional character, there is undeniable power behind "Sorry - / is all that you can't say; / years gone by and still / words don't come easily." (Once more, notice her ability to move your eyes, from the words - or lack of words - flowing from the mouth of her subject to the years that have passed by.) Then there's the little narrative trick of taking the _absence_ of someone's love and converting it into _presence_ through the hypothetical, "But you can say: Baby, / baby, can I hold you tonight?"

The strength of the music comes from her voice, in the same vein the power of the aforementioned Pop's music comes from his delivery. "Baby Can I Hold You" is the perfect example of this - as she sings "Years gone by, and still", she elongates the onset of "still", so it comes as a stutter: "s-s-still". This same effect comes later, in "Forgive me - is all that you can't s-s-say". Her voice is shaking, but what's incredible is that her voice, an alto, is still so strong despite its fears and misgivings, as if the words came out as terracotta from the earth. Which is funny, because she has a somewhat breathy style, dragging out the endings of words, really digging into her chest for certain vowels. But there's never a point in any of the music in "Tracy Chapman" where she screams, whispers (well, except in a lyric "Talkin' Bout a Revolution" literally concerning a whisper), fall above or below the instrumentals, she's never angry or sad to the point of madness, her voice is always steady and thus observant, which makes you want to listen to her and her rational powers more. She doesn't want her music to take you soaring into new heights, the wind in her voice is the wind sweeping the dust of canyons and deserts, the rugged wind of the American west where visions of hope are tempered with visions of pain, from more trials and tribulations. But even this tough material, too, can show cracks.

She needs this quality in abundance to get through "Fast Car", which is perhaps the most emotional of the content in the album. Just like the titular car, she's manuevering between hope and despair, and upon falling to either will lose the audience's sympathy entirely, earning either their ridicule or disgust.

She pulls off the perfect performance. Early on she provides this tearjerker: "My old man's got a problem: / he lives with a bottle, that's the way it is, / he says his body's too old for working, / his body's too young to look like his." I do love that repetition of the "body", which inadvertently directs our attention to our singer's body, full of youth and light. She sings none of this with rage or melancholy - though she provides us with a gleaming, singing quickly "his body's too young to look like his" as if in shame and frustration - to her it's merely a fact.

Of particular note is how Tracy connects sentences together. "Maybe we can make a deal; / maybe together we can get somewhere, / eh-ny place is better" - noticing how she hooks the end of "somewhere" and "any" together in one fluid motion, by getting around the palate-high "a" sound of "any" by transferring it to an "eh" sound, "eh-ny". Generally the song has a back-and-forth motif, where the ends of sentences are sung low and the beginnings are sung at a higher, more energetic volume, as if her hopes start and die down as time passes.

Which makes the fantastical elements of the song even more emotional, as she genuinely believes them. The opening lines, "You got a fast car, / I want a ticket to anywhere." "Anywhere" is ambiguous, so we usually take it as an exaggeration - it's not, and you can call the desire absurd, but it's the true desire. These little absurdities also reveal a bit of the character's personality; "me, myself, I got nothing to prove" is another, the double m's of "me, myself" demonstrating how much this exchange is about her above everything else. Considering later, concerning her old man, she "said, Somebody's got to take care of him, / so I quit school and that's what I did," few can argue it's out of base selfishness.

As the fast car races down the highway, Tracy has her most emotional lines: "I remember when we were driving, driving in your car, / speed so fast I felt like I was drunk; / city lights lay out before us / and your arm felt nice wrapped 'round my shoulder, / and I-eee-I, had a feeling that I belonged, / that I-eee-I, had a feeling I could be someone, / be someone, be someone..." Her voice trembles in the first half of the lyrics, as the car goes blindingly fast down the highway, then gathers clarity in the second half upon the feeling of joy and rejuvenation.

Admittedly, the second half of the song is weaker than the first. Perhaps it's my own fault for having my own interpretation of the song (though, I do think, that is what an audience should have). The character, who I feel is really fleshed-out in the beginning, takes a backseat in the second half of the song as she finds a job and tries to find domestic bliss. Chapman then tries to put an awkward bow on the song's themes, where her partner, the one who drove the fast car, is living an unhappy life beside her and is encouraged to take his fast car to find himself anew, as she once did. Well. It's a _neat_ twist. But I associate "Fast Car" with, well, the song's MacGuffin, the car itself, of a vehicle that can magically leave one's own situation, as incredible as Cinderella's carriage. The song is really about us and our desires to have better lives, and the first half of the song is extremely effective in painting the _emotions_ behind that, over the tedium of actually doing it. I suppose one could argue that the character learns to respect another human being's need for this, but I don't know.

Tracy earned quite a bit of fame recently for Luke Combs' cover of "Fast Car" in his 2023 album "Gettin' Old". It's hard to hear a cover for an immaculate song, though Combs' version is good. However, his voice suits country - it's steely, lacking the qualities of Chapman's voice which somehow mixes both shyness and brashness together. Instrumentally, the cover is a little busy. But he paid a lot of attention to _how_ she sang the song, which is quite an accomplishment given the hills and valleys the song goes through. For that, I surprisingly have little to say about the cover except that it's a fine cover, that doesn't add much to any interpretation to the song. If I have to touch briefly the """controversy""" surrounding the song, I direct the reader's attention to Combs' clear love for the song (as heard in the music itself) and for the songwriter: let's focus on the now and what joys we can take from it, chiefly because it's so difficult to do as it is.
