---
title: "Wonder Egg Priorty is the most offensive anime"
slug: "/wonder-egg-priority-is-the-most-offensive-anime"
createdAt: "2021-03-31T18:28:44+0000"
seoTitle: "Wonder Egg Priority"
seoDescription: "Wonder Egg Priority is just awful."
tags: ["animation", "anime"]
---

I've seen many awful anime, and I've heard of many awful anime as well - such as "Boku no Pico" - but with almost a decade of anime-watching behind me I can firmly say "Wonder Egg Priority" is the most offensive show I've seen up to now.

A friend of mine and I watched "Wonder Egg Priority" for a while, astonished by its existence, and after watching episode 11 we confirmed that it was not the intellectual quality of the show that offended us, but a deep, basic _moral_ quality, or lack of, that makes the show so terrible. It's easy to complain about how stupid most anime is - if you take simplistic characters and put them in "morally complex" (as the writers think it) situations, then you get a stupid result. Furthermore, if your comedy depends more on the characters being odd than actual jokes, then you wrote an unfunny comedy. It's not rocket science as to why so much anime is bad, but for the most part they only offend your intelligence. "Wonder Egg Priority" offends because of the sexualization of little girls and its nonchalance to graphic suicide and child abuse.

Of course the show is clever enough to hide behind a veneer of "Oh no, we're actually raising these issues to public attention," which comes off as a great load of BS when one watches the show. The premise of the show, simplified, is that four young girls - between the ages of 12 to 14, I believe - fight demons and retrieve eggs for the sake of reviving their dead friends; however the "reality" of the show is so confused that the audience is led to believe "demons = bullies", "eggs = psyche of young girls" and "fighting = female empowerment". First and foremost, what a fail. Rather than the audience drawing the conclusion on their own based on the quality of writing, they instead rely on heavy-handed "surreal" or "dream" "logic" for you to draw that conclusion. It just demonstrates how stupid the show is that they couldn't just say its message directly and had to rely on an analogy that has nothing, realistically, to do with the message. Second, as we noted while watching the show, almost all of the demons are rapists, except for one female demon, so the implication is that young girls are frequently prey for sexual predation. What? Even if that were true, _isn't there a better way to say this than through kung-fu fights?_ Third, I don't see how real-life women are empowered by magical weapons and animals. Fourth, none of the main characters have any distinct personality that can be traced back to any woman, except that they deal with depression.

This is a hollow, hollow, shitty script written by a 60-year-old man. You heard me right, the writer is the _furthest_ from writing young girls; Shinji Nojima is his name, look him up. But he can't take all the blame - all of the close-ups of girls' lips and thighs, that's the fucking director's fault, and his name is Shin Wakabayashi and you should definitely look him up and put him on a list. At the very least, both men are an example of how not to write and develop characters and stories. It staggers me how boring this show is, where nothing distinguishes the characters besides basic stereotypes (blondie is energetic, tall girl is stoic) and the action scenes are sequences of incomprehensible moves.

The drama is fucking laughable. "People make us feel bad and that's the problem." Hold up; yes, it _is_ a problem, but the problem is more nuanced than that by miles. You can watch literally anying else and it will handle this better than "Wonder Egg Priority". You take a person in the show and you give that person a distinguishing _character_, that's why we use the word "character", it refers to the uniqueness of that person. Then you put that person in a conflict, and you demonstrate how that person's uniqueness handles the conflict. That's a story. Let me repeat: THAT'S A STORY YOU DIMWITS. This is not hard - it's like fucking up toast with cheese!

The dumbness of the script is one of the reasons why the moral core of "Wonder Egg Priority" is so offensive, though it is inherently rotten.

There are very few instances of me giving up on watching a show, and there had been none where I gave up on it for more than sheer boredom. I gave up watching numerous Shinkai Makoto films because they were boring; ditto for "SSSS. Gridman" and "Stein;s Gate". I had to apologize to my friend for needing to stop watching the 11th episode of "Wonder Egg Priority", because it's genuinely uncomfortable to watch. It's genuinely uncomfortable when you have two adult men creating an "ideal" daughter and telling you, the audience, what an ideal daughter is, which I don't know is a slight dig on waifu culture, but it is certainly done poorly. It's genuinely uncomfortable when the same, I suppose robot, daughter electrocutes the pregnant wife of one of the men out of jealousy, thus causing her to give birth early and die. It's genuinely uncomfortable when the man then kicks the daughter, who is a REAL GIRL for all intents and purposes, down a set of stairs and then violently locks her in a locker in a dark basement (all in graphic detail, with blood). It's genuinely uncomfortable when the aforementioned baby grows up to be a 12-14-year-old girl and promises to propose to a man when she becomes older. It's genuinely uncomfortable when that same 12-14-year-old girl, whom we saw as a baby and grows up to offer her body to a 50-year-old, commits suicide by slicing her wrists in a bathtub. And then the writers piss you off by ending the episode with the main character depressed, crying over a pile of dirt and actively hating herself, and THEN cut to the ending credits which is a happy song with girls eating food.

This is a piece-of-shit show through and through and a big part of its shittiness is its fucking moral high horse of pretending to be for anyone. If you are a human being and have emotions and feelings and whatever, and you have beliefs about anything, about God or society or government or whatever, this show has an open disdain for everything that makes you human. It seeks to reduce everyone into abuse victim and abuser, and it asks you to take enjoyment out of the drama of young girls slitting their wrists and being dragged down stairs.

Don't watch this show and don't be bamboozled by the talk surrounding this show.